



ALEXANDER	DUGIN
PUTIN	VS	PUTIN
Vladimir	Putin	Viewed	from
the	Right
ARKTOS	2014

Contents
		Editor’s	Note		
1.	The	Making	of	Putin		
2.	Putin’s	Ideology		
3.	Putin’s	Test		
4.	Putin’s	Geopolitics		
5.	Putin’s	Eurasian	Revolution		
6.	Putin:	What	Next?		
7.	Criticism	of	Putin	from	Above		
		Appendix	I:The	War	on	Russia	in	Its	Ideological
Dimension	—	An	Analysis	from	the	Perspective
of	the	Fourth	Political	Theory		
		Appendix	II:	Some	Suggestions	Regarding	the
Prospects	for	the	Fourth	Political	Theory	in
Europe		

Editor’s	Note
This	book	was	originally	compiled	and	published
in	Russian	in	2012.	Some	of	its	texts	were	written
after	 Putin’s	 re-election,	 some	 were	 written
during	Medvedev’s	term,	and	some	were	written
during	Putin’s	first	presidency	(between	2000	and
2002).	Readers	should	keep	this	in	mind	as	the
tense	 in	 which	 Prof.	 Dugin	 refers	 to	 particular
events	sometimes	shifts.	The	appendices	were	all
written	in	the	first	half	of	2014.
Most	 of	 the	 footnotes	 to	 the	 text	 have	 been
added	 by	 me	 for	 this	 edition.	A	 small	 number
were	part	of	the	original	Russian	text,	and	these
are	denoted	with	an	‘AD’	following	them.	Where
sources	in	other	languages	have	been	cited,	I	have
attempted	to	replace	them	with	existing	English-
language	editions.	Citations	to	works	for	which	I
could	locate	no	translation	are	retained	in	their
original	language.	Website	addresses	for	on-line

sources	 were	 verified	 as	 accurate	 and	 available
during	the	period	of	August	and	September	2014.
The	appendices	were	translated	by	volunteers
from	the	Eurasia	Movement.
JOHN	B	MORGAN	IV
Budapest,	Hungary,	September	2014

1.	The	Making	of	Putin
‘Putin	is	the	ideal	ruler	for	the	current	period.	He
is	a	tragic	figure.	He	has	a	horrible	entourage,
made	up	of	exhausted	people,	a	sea	of	despicable
worms	who	are	fouling	up	the	entire	field	of	his
movement.	And	he	is	methodically	and	steadily,
bit	by	bit,	clearing	away	all	this	dismal	legacy.
He	is	like	an	alchemist	turning	black	into	white.	It
is	 only	 getting	 grey	 so	 far	 but	 this	 is	 just	 the
beginning.	 The	 dawn	 is	 breaking,	 the	 dawn	 in
boots.	 I	 believe	 in	 Putin	 and	 I	 entirely	 support
him.’
—	An	extract	from	an	interview	with	Alexander	Dugin	for
the	Website	Dni.ru,	19	January	2001
‘Mr	 Putin	 is	 a	 product	 of	 the	 Tsarist-Soviet
security	system,	a	traditionalist	who	believes	that
the	only	way	to	sustain	order	and	protect	the	state
is	 through	 authoritarianism.	 Therefore	 his

political,	legal,	and	military	reforms	are	going	to
impede	progress’.
—	Boris	Berezovsky,	‘The	Problem	with	Putin’,	The
Financial	Times,	28	May	2002		

Introduction
Putin:	The	Unknown	Revealed
As	 soon	 as	 Putin	 appeared,	 several	 significant
factors	contributed	from	the	outset	to	a	positive
assessment	 of	 his	 personality.	 First,	 a	 harsh
resentment	towards	the	new	Russian	leader	was
expressed	 by	 ultra-liberals,	 the	 ‘democratic
schizos’,	 as	 they	 were	 called	 at	 the	 time,
spearheaded	by	the	notorious	Sergei	Adamovich
Kovalev.
[1]
	Their	message	was,	‘Putin	belongs	to
the	murderous	KGB,	he	is	a	throwback	to	the	past.
He	is	a	Red-Brown.’
[2]
	The	attack	from	their	side
immediately	 meant	 for	 us	 that	 Putin	 was	 ‘our
man’:	he	was	a	patriot	and	a	decent	man	to	boot.
The	ultra-’democratic	schizos’	were	joined,	with
less	 gleeful	 abandon,	 by	 the	 more	 moderate

‘democratic	schizos’	—	Gusinsky,
[3]
	Yavlinsky
[4]
and	the	ultra-Atlanticists,	as	well	as	Primakov
[5]
and	Luzhkov
[6]
	who	were	affiliated	with	them	at
some	 point.	 They	 had	 the	 following	 message:
Putin	is	a	nationalist	and	pro-superpower,	and	a
protégé	of	the	Yeltsin	family	and	the	Berezovsky-
Abramovich-Mamut
[7]
	 clan.	 But	 it	 was	 evident
that	 his	 association	 with	 a	 certain	 clan	 was	 a
consequence	 of	 their	 competition	 with	 another
clan,	and	such	criticisms	also	proved	beneficial
for	Putin.
The	 ‘patriots’,	 such	 as	 Prokhanov
[8]
	 and
Zyuganov,
[9]
	very	cautiously	and	almost	officially
proclaimed	that	Putin	was	a	‘Yeltsinist’.	But	if
they	had	said	that	Putin	was	a	hero,	nobody	would
understand	them.
Those	who	were	anti-Chechnya	were	pleased
by	Putin’s	tough	stance.	They	did	not	understand
the	rest	of	his	policies,	because	they	were	simple

voters,	who	ultimately	gave	their	collective	votes
to	Putin.
The	oligarch	Berezovsky,	who	was	responsible
for	the	‘technical	support’	behind	the	handover	of
power,	crafted	a	patriotic	image	for	Putin.	Then
he	 inadvertently	 became	 a	 ‘corruptor’	 of	 the
Eurasian	type’	(not	just	a	corruptor),	because	the
channels	of	the	official	withdrawal	of	capital	to
the	United	States	and	NATO	member	states	were
closed	to	him.	‘Now	he	will	play	with	Asia’,	some
thought	 at	 that	 point.	 He	 did	 not	 give	 a	 damn
about	liberal	democrats.
It	is	clear	that	corruption	is	a	bad	thing,	but	the
immediate	  eradication	  of	  corruption	  is
impossible.	It	is	a	good	slogan	but	every	time	one
has	to	keep	track	of	who	benefits	from	it.	Rooting
out	 certain	 corrupt	 groups	 at	 a	 certain	 point	 is
only	beneficial	to	their	competitors.	Simple	folk
will	 not	 gain	 a	 single	 ruble	 from	 such
manoeuvres.	 In	 order	 to	 eradicate	 it,	 a	 ‘mental

revolution’	is	necessary.	The	Eurasians	think	that
corruption	 must	 be	 dealt	 with	 in	 stages,	 first
crushing	corruptors	who	work	against	the	state	for
the	 benefit	 of	 the	 Atlantic	 hegemon,	 and	 then
crushing	the	rest	of	them,	including	corruptors	of
the	 domestic	 Eurasian	 type.	 In	 fact,	 during	 the
first	 stage	 of	 the	 fight	 against	 the	 Atlanticist
corruptors	one	can	side	with	the	Eurasian	type,
and	later	get	even	with	the	latter.
Chubais
[10]
	made	an	attempt	to	draw	Putin	over
to	the	liberals	using	Putin’s	outspoken	patriotism
as	 a	 cover	 for	 the	 upcoming	 wave	 of	 liberal
reform	on	the	instructions	of	the	West.	This	was
the	attempted	strategy	of	the	most	liberal	party	of
the	period,	The	Union	of	Right	Forces	(SPS),
[11]
then	headed	by	Sergei	Kirienko.
[12]
The	 fact	 that	 Putin	 was	 born	 in	 Saint
Petersburg	and	worked	with	Chubais	and	Anatoly
Sobchak
[13]
	 was	 an	 obvious	 drawback.	 The

Russian	 people	 have	 always	 treated	 Saint
Petersburg	 with	 suspicion.	 Moscow	 gained
special	 importance	 when	 Constantinople	 fell,
when	Russia	became	the	last	Orthodox	Tsardom,
and	 the	 last	 Orthodox	 empire.	 The	 city	 always
played	 a	 significant	 eschatological	 role	 in
Orthodox	Russia.	It	was	said	that	‘Moscow	is	the
Third	Rome’.	The	meaning	of	the	Tsardom	was
that	of	a	state	which	recognises	the	truth	of	the
Orthodox	 church	 in	 its	 entirety,	 and	 which	 is
traditionally	considered	a	barrier	in	the	way	of	the
son	of	perdition,	the	Antichrist,	the	katechon,	‘the
one	who	withholds’	(the	Second	Epistle	of	Paul	to
the	Thessalonians).	The	fall	of	Byzantium	meant,
from	 the	 apocalyptic	 Orthodox	 perspective,	 the
dawn	of	apostasy	and	the	universal	rejection	of
Christianity.	 Moscow	 is	 the	 capital	 of	 an
essentially	new	state:	not	national,	but	imperial,
soteriological,	eschatological,	and	apocalyptical.
It	 is	 the	 last	 outpost	 of	 salvation,	 the	Ark,	 the

ground	 prepared	 for	 the	 descent	 of	 the	 New
Jerusalem.	‘And	there	will	be	no	fourth.’
[14]
‘Peter’,
[15]
	 Saint	 Petersburg,	 since	 day	 one
established	the	Third	Russia	in	terms	of	quality,
structure	 and	 meaning.	 In	 a	 sense,	 this	 capital
does	not	exist	and	cannot	exist.	‘There	will	be	no
fourth	Rome.’	This	is	already	far	from	a	national
state	or	a	soteriological	Ark.	This	is	a	strange,
giant	chimera,	a	post	mortem	land	and	people	who
are	 existing	 and	 developing	 in	 a	 parallel	 realm
located	beyond	history.	This	is	a	city	from	‘Navi,’
the	dark	side,	a	city	of	moonlight,	water,	strange
buildings,	which	are	alien	to	the	rhythm	of	history
and	the	national	and	religious	aesthetics.	This	is
the	reason	why	the	authorities	located	in	Moscow
were	seen	as	miracle-workers.	In	this	case	it	was
about	the	transmutation	of	the	‘Peter-based’	into
the	‘Moscow-based’.
The	fact	that	Putin	was	born	into	a	worker’s
family	is	remarkable.	It	was	also	rumoured	that

he	 was	 an	 Old	 Believer.
[16]
	 I	 personally	 liked
Putin’s	 psychological	 portrait	 in	 the	Zavtra
newspaper:	 ‘A	 young	 wolf	 cub’,	 a	 judo	 expert
who	is	cruel	and	ruthless	towards	enemies.	Very
disciplined.	The	ruler	of	a	great	empire	during	a
crucial	point	in	history	cannot	be	an	intelligent
and	 righteous	 Mr	 Nice	 Guy.	 There	 must	 be	 a
‘crowned	 thunderstorm’,	 the	 Terror	 of	 God.
Everyone	must	shake	with	fear.
One	thing	is	certain	now:	already	at	that	point,
after	his	emergence,	I	thought	that	Putin	was	not
an	answer	but	a	task	to	be	taken	on,	and	the	total
balance	of	all	his	various	facets	is,	overall,	more
Eurasian	than	Atlanticist.	Putin	could	not	break
free	from	the	objective	laws	of	geopolitics.	Even
Yeltsin	during	his	last	years	in	office	was	not	free
from	 them,	 let	 alone	 Primakov	 during	 his
ministerial	term.
Of	 course,	 many	 things	 depended	 on	 his
entourage	and	the	battle	of	ideas	around	him.	A

huge	 part	 of	Yeltsin’s	 legacy	 was	 concentrated
around	Putin,	the	extirpation	of	which	had	to	take
a	long	time.
As	 a	 result,	 the	 debates	 around	 Putin’s
personality,	since	he	had	appeared	seemingly	out
of	nowhere,	led	to	significant	discord	in	all	the
political	 sectors	 of	 our	 society.	 He	 was	 named
‘the	great	unknown’	for	a	reason.	But	Putin	was
‘an	 unknown	 revealed’,	 and	 with	 very
sympathetic	features.	This	is	how	we	thought	of
him	at	the	turn	of	the	century.
Patriot	Plays
How	Putin	Came	to	Power:	PR-Patriotism
Vladimir	 Putin	 became	 Yeltsin’s	 chosen
successor	 under	 the	 following	 political	 scheme.
Russia’s	 pro-Western	 ‘democratic’	 elite	 —
oligarchs,	 mediacrats,	 liberal	 intelligentsia,	 and
Moscow	citizens	who	were	sponging	off	of	the

interests	of	foreign	powers	and	so	on	—	realising
that	Yeltsin	was	unable	to	rule	and	that	an	explicit
adoption	 of	 a	 liberal	 Atlanticist	 course	 would
alienate	the	majority	of	the	population,	made	up
their	mind	to	promote	a	manageable	patriot	with
populist	 features.	 The	 same	 scenario	 had	 been
prepared	for	Alexander	Lebed.
[17]
	Due	to	a	number
of	factors,	Putin	was	elected.	This	is	an	important
fact:	 Putin	 was	 promoted	 by	 the	 Atlanticists,
liberals	  and	  pro-Western	  oligarchs.	  His
‘patriotism’	 was	 initially	 intended	 to	 be
controlled	and	merely	a	front;	it	was	in	essence
‘PR-patriotism’.
This	  PR-patriotism	  employed	  several
components:	 its	 scenario,	 its	 directors,	 and	 its
cast.	The	scenario	was	elaborated	with	the	eager
participation	of	Boris	Berezovsky;	the	directors
were	Alexander	Voloshin,
[18]
	Vladislav	Surkov
[19]
and	 Gleb	 Pavlovsky,
[20]
	 and	 the	 principal	 roles
were	 played	 by	 Putin	 and	 his	 Saint	 Petersburg

entourage.	 It	 was	 clear	 from	 the	 outset	 that	 a
demonstration	 of	 patriotism	 would	 require
spectacular,	large-scale	action.	The	scriptwriters
proposed	to	use	Chechnya,	which	had	previously
played	an	important	part	in	the	Atlanticist	project
of	Russia’s	disintegration.	This	part	of	the	plan
worked	 as	 planned:	 after	 the	 September	 1999
apartment	 bombings	 in	 Moscow
[21]
	 the	 Russian
army	 entered	 Dagestan,	 the	 second	 Chechnya
campaign	 took	 place	 and	 Grozny	 was	 captured
(1999–2000).	 The	 disintegration	 of	 the	 country
and	the	separation	of	Chechnya	were	prevented.
This	is	how	Putin	was	legitimised.	In	retrospect	it
is	clear	that	Berezovsky’s	iron	grip	was	involved.
He	later	became	an	outcast	in	London	in	2001,
where	he	was	killed	in	March	2013.
The	First	Term:	The	Patriotic	Jazz
Then	one	day,	the	directors	decided	to	get	rid	of
the	scriptwriters	of	the	first	draft,	labelling	them

‘enemy	number	two’	(‘enemy	number	one’	being
the	 Chechen	 terrorists).	 It	 started	 with	 the
political	liquidation	of	the	media	mogul	Vladimir
Gusinsky,	 who	 was	 a	 member	 of	 the	 first
scriptwriters’	team.	Then	Berezovsky	was	exiled.
This	 further	 strengthened	 the	 overall	 system,
making	 the	 directors	 the	 ultimate	 authority	 in
Russian	politics.
This	 period	 can	 be	 dubbed	 ‘presidential-
administration-ocracy’.	In	effect,	the	country	was
controlled	 by	 the	 presidential	 administration:
Voloshin	 and	 Surkov.	 They	 were	 the	 ones	 who
determined	the	balance	between	‘patriotism’	and
‘liberalism’.	This	balance	was	constantly	adjusted
but	one	aspect	was	consistent:	liberalism	was	the
end	and	patriotism	was	the	means	to	get	to	it.	The
national	 aspects	 of	 the	 drama	 were	 subject	 to
Atlanticist	 interests	 (in	 foreign	 policy)	 and
liberalism	 (in	 the	 economy).	 The	 patriotic
rhetoric	and	demagoguery	were	not	supposed	to

be	backed	up	by	any	fundamental	and	irreversible
substantive	 activity.	 The	 formula	 was	 built
around	superficial	patriotism.
But	after	the	removal	of	the	‘scriptwriters’	the
patriotic	 posturing	 started	 to	 get	 some	 vague
autonomous	backing.	This	group	was	nicknamed
‘the	 Peter	 Guys’.
[22]
	 The	 Peter	 Guys	 were	 not
exactly	 a	 closely-knit	 group	 or	 a	 clear-cut
ideological	group,	but	the	discharge	of	the	initial
scriptwriters	opened	up	more	space,	strengthening
the	position	of	the	actors	and	giving	them	more
freedom.	The	overall	action	of	the	play,	The	First
Term,	was	controlled	by	the	directors,	but	the	exit
of	the	scriptwriters	left	some	gaps	in	the	script,
which	 were	 immediately	 filled	 in	 by	 the
‘improvisors’.	 The	 Peter	 Guys	 tried	 to	 turn	 a
classical	orchestra	with	a	set	score	into	patriotic
jazz	 improvisation.	 Their	 main	 character	 was
turning	into	a	cult	figure.
This	was	how	a	‘caprice’	came	about.	The	star

started	 to	 meddle	 with	 the	 plot.	 The	 directors
shook	their	heads.	One	of	the	last	proposals	of	the
Petersburg	 jazzmen	 was	 to	 butcher	 the	 patrons
and	 entrepreneurs.	 In	 fact,	 it	 was	 quite	 logical
because,	overall,	the	performance	was	successful
and	became	a	box	office	hit.	At	the	political	level
it	 meant	 that	 ‘patriotism’	 gradually	 became	 as
important	as	liberalism.	It	had	become	clear	that
they	both	now	stood	at	the	same	level.	The	actors
proclaimed	that	they	were	their	own	directors.
All	Power	to	the	Actors
Then	 new	 factors	 rushed	 into	 Russian	 political
life.	 The	 ‘new	 stagnation’	 was	 essentially	 over
and	we	had	to	deal	with	the	juxtaposition	of	three
elements:	 a	 residual	 political	 scenario	 (liberal-
democratic	 reforms	 in	 a	 slapstick	 patriotism
sauce	à	la	Zhirinovsky);
[23]
	a	residual	political	and
economic	 leadership	 	 (the	 influence	 of	 the
oligarchs,	the	Yeltsin	family,	mediacrats,	and	the

community	 of	 experts	 —	 here	 the	 new
‘patriotism’	was	kept	under	strict	control)	and	the
new	improvisations	(here	patriotism	for	the	first
time	got	a	chance	to	become	fully-fledged).
So,	these	actors	in	the	wrong	play	took	power
in	 the	 theatre.	 What	 were	 they	 facing?	At	 this
point	the	project	required	new	directors	and	a	new
script.	 A	 dangerous	 illusion	 emerged	 that	 by
poisoning	the	patrons,	cutting	off	the	electricity
in	the	boxes	and	kicking	the	director	out	would
mean	a	triumph	for	the	President,	the	authorities
and	society.	But	behind	a	successful	coup	there
are	 deep	 factors	 related	 to	 mass	 psychology:	 a
coup	must	be	backed	by	history,	geopolitics,	and
the	 collective	 unconscious.	 Luckily,	 these
repercussions	 (which	 were	 devised	 by	 the
scriptwriters,	 who	 were	 estranged	 from	 the
masses	and,	therefore,	understood	them	perfectly)
worked,	but	it	was	not	the	actors’	achievement.
Let’s	 face	 it:	 if	 the	 Peter	 Guys	 (as	 a	 socio-

psychological	 type)	 devised	 something	 along
these	lines	on	their	own,	they	would	still	belong
to	the	fringe	of	provincial	law	enforcement.	They
were	 hastily	 dressed,	 made	 up	 and	 jostled
onstage.	On	the	other	hand,	the	scriptwriters	and
directors	themselves	underestimated	the	success
of	 the	 performance.	 The	 spectators	 started
wrecking	 the	 concert	 hall,	 shouting	 ‘Encore!
Bravo!	Rub	’em	all	out	in	the	outhouse!’
[24]
	and
the	actors	loved	it.	Rubbing	’em	out	is	fun,	but	it
is	not	enough.
So,	a	new	script	was	needed.	Luckily,	the	Peter
Guys	 themselves	 realistically	 assessed	 the
contents	 of	 what	 they	 had	 to	 work	 with.	 The
slogan	 ‘away	 with	 the	 director’	 also	 created	 a
problem.	It	was	now	unclear	what	exactly	needed
to	be	directed.	The	first	thing	that	springs	to	mind
is	 to	 invite	 the	 assistant	 director	 and	 the
backstage	crew	to	do	it,	or	perhaps	the	prompters,
so	that	they	could	make	up	the	text	in	their	box	as

the	play	went	along.	It	was	a	reasonable	idea,	but
it	is	not	hard	to	guess	who	would	have	been	their
puppeteer	(or,	who	would	have	called	the	tune).
Those	who	had	been	fired	did	not	vanish	into	thin
air.	Let	us	not	forget:	they	owned	the	theatre.	The
only	thing	the	rebelling	actors	were	left	with	was
the	ecstatic	crowd:	the	keys	to	the	backstage,	the
cafeteria,	and	even	the	dressing	rooms	were	gone.
The	performance’s	programme	had	undergone
significant	changes.	The	years	ahead	raised	a	lot
of	 questions,	 and	 it	 was	 important	 to	 note	 the
objective	factors,	resources,	and	possibilities	they
presented.	But	the	will	and	the	intellect	are	a	lot
more	 important.	 Sadly,	 they	 are	 in	 very	 short
supply.	Given	this	situation,	the	default	position
of	patriotism	was	a	highly	probable	outcome,	and
this	time	a	defeat	could	have	been	fatal.	In	all	the
hustle	 and	 bustle	 they	 could	 throw	 anyone
forward:	 ‘You	 write	 the	 script’	 and	 ‘You	 will
direct	it’.	But,	as	is	often	the	case,	these	tasks

were	given	to	the	actors	themselves,	as	well	as	the
stagehands,	the	lighting	technicians,	and	even	the
ticket-takers.	Creating	a	political	elite	with	a	new
ideology	is	a	time-consuming	and	laborious	task.
For	 the	 first	 eight	 years	 the	 Putin	 men	 were
engaged	 in	 anything	 but	 this.	 Today	 the
circumstances	 have	 made	 the	 issue	 of	 ‘grey
patriotic	matter’	especially	relevant.
The	Twelve	Labours	of	Putin
Even	 at	 the	 outset	 of	 his	 first	 term,	 Putin
accomplished	 labours	 worthy	 of	 Hercules,	 very
concrete	feats.
Labour	No.	1:	He	prevented	the	disintegration
of	Russia	in	the	Caucasus,	built	a	bulwark	against
the	 Wahhabi
[25]
	 invasion	 of	 Dagestan,	 and
repossessed	 two-thirds	 of	 Chechnya	 (leaving	 a
third	under	the	control	of	the	rebels).
Labour	 No.	 2:	 He	 cracked	 down	 on	 the
parochialism	fostered	by	the	previous	regime.	In

one	 swift	 move	 he	 cut	 the	 Federation	 Council
down	to	size,	which	went	from	being	a	body	of
dissent	 to	 a	 quietly	 obedient	 organisation.	 He
boxed	 the	 ears	 of	 the	 governors	 and	 booed	 the
brash	national	separatists	in	the	republics.
Labour	No.	3:	He	introduced	federal	districts,
tying	 the	 administrative-territorial	 structure	 of
the	Russian	Federation	(RF)	to	a	military	scheme,
which	gave	ample,	albeit	nominal,	powers	to	civil
servants,	 who	 are	 not	 elected	 but	 appointed	 by
Moscow,	 and	 who	 are	 responsible,	 first	 and
foremost,	 for	 national	 security	 and	 who	 report
directly	to	the	federal	government.	These	are	the
strongholds	of	Russia.
Labour	 No.	 4:	 He	 exiled	 the	 two	 most
notorious	oligarchs	from	Russia,	who	had	only	a
moment	before	manipulated	the	country,	public
opinion,	the	government,	and	the	President	in	any
way	they	wanted	and	gotten	away	with	it.	The	rest
were	cut	down	to	size.			

Labour	 No.	 5:	 He	 gave	 a	 green	 light	 to	 the
integration	 processes	 in	 the	 Commonwealth	 of
Independent	States	(CIS),	proclaimed	the	creation
of	  the	  Eurasian	  Economic	  Community
(EurAsEC),
[26]
	supported	the	Eurasian	idea	in	his
Astana	 speech	 (at	 Gumilev	 University),
[27]
	 and
announced	 the	 establishment	 of	 the	 Common
Economic	 Space	 (CES),	 including	 the	 RF,
Belarus,	Ukraine,	and	Kazakhstan.
Labour	No.	6:	He	included	the	concept	of	a
multipolar	world
[28]
	in	his	national	security	policy
for	 the	 RF,	 which	 practically	 means	 that
Eurasianism
[29]
	has	been	legally	recognised	as	the
primary	international	strategy	of	Russia.
None	of	the	above	had	been	realised	by	Boris
Yeltsin,	who,	in	fact,	did	just	the	opposite	on	all
six	points:	it	was	Yeltsin	who	gave	birth	to	all	the
policies	that	Putin	set	out	to	eliminate.
It	is	evident	that	Putin	has	achieved	a	number

of	profound	things.	The	bread-and-butter	nature
of	his	actions	has	brought	me	personally	and	the
Eurasia	 Movement,	 which	 is	 headed	 by	 me,	 to
support	President	Putin	and	the	radical	centre.
Unaccomplished	Labours
The	labours	that	Putin	has	not	yet	accomplished
are:
Labour	No.	1:	He	has	not	fully	completed	the
first	six	points.		
Labour	No.	2:	He	has	not	finally	made	up	his
mind	concerning	relations	with	the	United	States.
Labour	No.	3:	He	has	not	understood	the	dead-
end	nature	of	using	the	radical-liberal	paradigm
in	economics.
Labour	 No.	 4:	 He	 has	 not	 implemented	 a
rotation	 of	 the	 political	 elite.	 The	 old	 political
apparatus	 is	 still	 working	 according	 to	 the
previous	 model	 and	 its	 seeming	 technical
efficiency	conceals	its	fundamental	inadequacy.

Labour	No.	5:	He	has	not	gathered	an	efficient
team	 of	 his	 own	 that	 he	 could	 call	 upon	 for
assistance	in	the	process	of	further	reform.
Labour	No.	6:	He	has	not	yet	tackled	in	earnest
the	strengthening	of	the	Eurasian	ideology	as	the
basis	of	Russia’s	place	in	the	world	of	the	future.
These	 six	 accomplished	 and	 unaccomplished
labours	characterise	Putin’s	current	position.	This
is	his	status	quo.	Putin	is	like	a	tight-rope	walker
standing	halfway	over	the	precipice.	Now	he	is
facing	a	painful	dilemma:	which	direction	should
he	 take,	 forward	 or	 backwards?	 But	 whatever
decision	he	makes,	he	will	face	significant	risks.
Following	the	logic	of	his	first	six	feats,	one	has
to	go	all	the	way	and	complete	the	other	six.	This
definitely	incurs	risks,	since	opposition	from	all
sides,	especially	the	Atlanticists,	will	only	grow,
and	 the	 rope	 is	 thin.	 If	 it	 breaks	 there	 is	 a
precipice	 underneath.	 Turning	 back	 is	 equally
risky.	Everything	that	he	has	done	up	to	now	will

turn	against	him	with	all	its	might.	Specifically,
in	 this	 case	 he	 will	 have	 to	 stand	 against	 a
burgeoning	 Eurasianism.	 In	 effect,	 the	 Putin
majority	that	liberal	analysts	like	to	discuss	so
much	is	in	fact	the	‘Eurasian	majority’.
We	applaud	his	first	six	feats,	sympathise	with
the	extremely	complicated	historical	and	political
situation	 in	 which	 Putin	 operates,	 and	 we	 fully
support	 the	 logic	 of	 his	 deeds	 and	 wish	 him
success	in	realising	the	rest	of	them.	We	are	ready
to	join	him	in	this	realisation	in	any	capacity	and
on	any	basis.	We	want	Putin	to	bring	everything
to	 a	 conclusion,	 to	 continue	 achieving	 his
Herculean	labours.	Of	course,	if	Putin	decides	to
turn	back	by	reversing	his	earlier	deeds	—	if	he
gives	Chechnya	to	the	Wahhabis,	for	example,	or
offers	 sovereignty	 to	 those	 who	 just	 can’t	 get
enough	 of	 it,	 or	 brings	 the	 oligarchs	 back	 to
Russia	 and	 begs	 for	 their	 forgiveness,	 releases
Khodorkovsky,
[30]
	 annuls	 the	 federal	 districts,

repents	 on	 NTV,
[31]
	 revises	 his	 conception	 of
national	security	by	accepting	unipolar	globalism
and	 prioritises	American	 interests	 over	 Russian
national	 interests,	 or	 dissolves	 the	 CIS	 and
EurAsEC	—	then	it	will	be	very	hard	to	support
him.	But	it	will	not	be	the	Putin,	the	man	over	the
precipice,	but	rather	some	kind	of	dark	double.
However,	 if	 you	 think	 about	 how	 much	 has
changed,	 you	 will	 realise	 that	 today	 such	 a
scenario	is	no	longer	likely.		
On	the	Brink	of	Collapse
One	has	to	admit	that	Putin’s	liberal	economic
policy	 is	 not	 exactly	 in	 accord	 with	 Eurasian
orthodoxy	 which,	 for	 its	 own	 part,	 strives	 to
develop	the	social	sector,	implementing	economic
planning	in	strategic	areas	and	placing	national
interests	above	a	purely	market-based	logic.	After
9/11	 the	 issue	 of	 Russian–American	 relations
became	ambiguous,	not	to	say	conflicting,	to	the

extent	 that	 short-tempered	 patriots,	 prone	 to
panic,	started	talking	about	‘Putin’s	betrayal	of
Eurasian	 interests’.	 I	 tried	 not	 to	 jump	 to	 any
immediate	conclusions,	but	the	tightrope	walker’s
hesitation	 at	 the	 halfway	 point	 was	 all	 too
evident.
Incidentally,	the	post-9/11	Putin	majority	was
declared	as	dissolved	by	the	political	analyst	Gleb
Pavlovsky.	 He	 based	 this	 proposal	 on	 the
ephemeral	 notion	 of	 ‘civil	 society’
[32]
	 —	 a
concept,	created	by	an	erratic	liberal	Atlanticist
group,	which	is	quite	alien	to	Russia.	
For	my	part,	I	have	always	reckoned	that	Putin
will	 balance	 (undoubtedly	 within	 Eurasianism)
between	 the	 two	 extremes:	 Left	 (socialist)
Eurasianism	 and	 Right	 (liberal)	 Eurasianism.
Alas,	it	subsequently	emerged	that	the	Atlanticist
tendencies	among	the	country’s	leaders	were	still
in	play.	But	the	USA,	by	definition,	does	not	have
a	positive	geopolitical	scenario	to	offer	Russia.	A

good	 Russia	 for	 the	 US	 is	 a	 weak	 Russia:	 a
shrivelled,	 emaciated,	 disjointed	 Russia,	 near
dead,	 ‘a	 black	 hole’,	 as	 defined	 by	 Zbigniew
Brzezinski.
[33]
	This	is	why	the	Atlanticist	course
would	 inevitably	 lead	 to	 a	 dead	 end,	 and	 its
disastrous	 and	 unpopular	 nature	 is	 becoming
more	and	more	evident	to	Putin,	which	means	that
his	conversion	to	Eurasianism	became	inevitable.
I	 thought	 that	 it	 should	 have	 happened	 much
earlier,	naturally	and	consistently,	but	history	in
the	 subjunctive	 is	 quite	 pointless.	 Reality
corrected	 our	 forecasts	 relating	 to	 his	 labours:
Putin	 failed	 to	 use	 the	 time	 of	 his	 first
presidential	term	for	a	consistent	and	irreversible
realisation	 of	 Eurasian	 reforms,	 and	 did	 not
manage	to	achieve	all	twelve	labours.	In	summing
up	Putin’s	overall	activity	during	his	first	term
from	 the	 Eurasian	 perspective,	 one	 has	 to
acknowledge	that,	after	adopting	some	Eurasian
measures,	Putin	met	with	Eurasianism’s	lack	of

consistency	 in	 the	 professional,	 ideological,
organisational	and	presentational	sense,	and	under
growing	pressure	from	the	Atlanticists	he	failed
to	consistently	toe	the	Eurasian	 line.	 Naturally,
the	 US,	 realising	 that	 Eurasianism	 was
challenging	 its	 global	 domination,	 was	 not
wasting	its	time.
Despite	stating	this	I	would	like	to	note	that
the	 Eurasianists	 never	 gave	 up	 their	 hopes	 for
Vladimir	 Putin,	 neither	 did	 they	 abandon	 their
fight	for	him.	At	the	same	time,	new	horizons	for
difficult	work	were	opened.	Without	a	solid	and
dependable	 foundation	 —	 theoretical,	 political,
organisational,	administrative,	and	economic	—
Putin’s	Eurasian	reforms	have	no	chance	of	being
realised.	 Therefore,	 we	 will	 have	 to	 continue
working	with	our	sleeves	rolled	up	for	Putin,	and
in	 the	 name	 of	 Putin,	 in	 order	 to	 have	 a	 truly
popular	 leader	 supported	 by	 the	 ‘Eurasian
majority’.

Putin	becomes	an	Ideal	Ruler	of	the
Period
In	the	year	1999,	in	the	seventh	month,
from	the	sky	will	come	the	great	King	of	Terror,
bringing	 back	 to	 life	 the	 great	 King	 of	 the
Mongols.
Before	and	after,	Mars	to	reign	by	good	fortune.
—	Michel	de	Nostredame	(Nostradamus)
[34]
Instead	of	the	great	King	of	Terror,	on	11	August
1999	there	came	Putin.
—	Alexander	Dugin,	New	Year’s	Speech	to	Arctogaia,
[35]
31	December	1999			
My	principal	field	of	activity	is	the	exploration	of
ontology:	I	am	interested	in	the	field	of	meanings,
nodes	 of	 being,	 and	 paradigms	 which	 manifest
themselves	 everywhere	 and	 in	 everything.	 One
can	say	that	I	am	an	ontological	philosopher.	All
the	 other	 elements	 —	 sociology,	 history	 of

religion,	 geopolitics,	 political	 science,	 cultural
studies,	literary	studies,	and	so	forth,	stem	from
ontology.
For	many	strenuous	years	my	hard-won	ideas,
which	 came	 at	 enormous	 cost	 and	 effort,	 were
pilfered	 at	 every	 turn	 by	 hordes	 of	 intellectual
jackals	and	mainstream	plagiarists.	These	years
brought	 me	 nothing	 but	 a	 barrage	 of	 criticism,
suppression,	 abuse,	 and	 filth.	 I	 did	 not	 even
manage	to	achieve	things	which	mediocre	social
second-raters	are	usually	able	to	achieve	through
far	less	effort.
Power	from	the	Eurasian	Perspective:
Predetermination
In	this	context	I	understand	power	by	Byzantine
standards,	as	a	kind	of	immanent	absolute.	Any
power	comes	from	God,	but	God	does	not	always
bring	good	news.	Sometimes	the	power	to	do	evil
is	granted	to	people	as	a	test	of	their	loyalty	to

God,	as	a	temptation.	Then,	following	the	lead	of
Saint	 Joseph	 Volotsky
[36]
	 and	 Protopope
Avvakum,
[37]
	 one	 must	 say	 ‘no’	 to	 evil	 power,
right	down	to	regicide,	even	if	a	Tsar	abnegates
his	faith,	the	sacred	legacy	of	‘our	venerable	and
God-bearing	fathers’.	But,	albeit	evil	and	satanic,
their	power	still	remains	holy	and	sacral,	but	in	a
negative	sense.	It	was	on	this	basis	that	I	initially
assessed	  the	  emergence	  of	  Vladimir
Vladimirovich	Putin.	Everything	he	said	and	did
was	 perfectly	 in	 line	 with	 the	 reality	 of
contemporary	Russia,	everything	represented	our
salvation	in	the	right	way,	the	salvation	of	our
motherland.	Putin	is	the	ideal	ruler	for	the	current
period.	He	is	a	tragic	figure:	he	 has	 a	 horrible
entourage	made	up	of	exhausted	people,	a	sea	of
despicable	worms	who	are	fouling	up	the	entire
field	of	his	movement.	And	he	is	methodically
and	steadily,	bit	by	bit,	clearing	away	all	of	this
dismal	 legacy.	 He	 is	 like	 an	 alchemist	 turning

black	into	white.	It	is	only	getting	grey	so	far	but
this	is	just	the	beginning.	The	dawn	is	breaking,
the	dawn	in	boots.
[38]
	I	devoted	that	article	to	the
way	 the	 new	 Eurasian	 order	 —	 the	 solar,
transcendental,	 continental	 KGB	 —	 would
establish	the	positive	values	of	Eurasia.	I	thought
at	the	time	that	this	order	should	include	a	new
breed	 of	 young	 people,	 merciless	 towards	 their
enemies,	ironic,	with	a	crimson	glimmer	in	their
eyes	and	leather	dragon	wings	behind	their	backs,
with	binoculars	and	walking	sticks,	poison	rings
and	time	bombs.	My	imagination	painted	a	vision
of	a	golden	dawn,	a	dawn	in	boots.	I	came	to	the
conclusion	 that	 turning	 the	 country	 toward	 a
patriotic	 mood,	 retaining	 its	 territorial	 integrity
and	 developing	 it	 independently	 along	 its	 own
national	path	required	people	of	a	new	type,	a	new
social	layer.	Such	people,	I	thought,	would	come
not	 from	 political	 parties,	 the	 bureaucracy,	 or
from	 the	 business	 sector,	 but	 from	 the	 secret

service.	 I	 thought	 that	 they	 should	 be	 state
officials	 who	 constantly	 deal	 with	 the	 dark,
secretive	side	of	things	and	who	would	become	a
staple	 of	 the	 Eurasian	 renaissance.	 As
professional	 patriots,	 they	 should	 have	 begun	 a
new	round	of	nation-building	—	the	realisation	of
the	Eurasian	project.
I	still	believe	in	Putin	and	support	him.	The
fact	that	it	was	he	who	replaced	Yeltsin	seems
like	providence.	Although	sometimes	I	think	that
the	 Eurasian	 position	 that	 we	 talk	 about	 in
reference	 to	 Putin	 would	 have	 been	 taken	 by
(almost)	any	other	successor	to	Yeltsin.	And	even
Yeltsin	 in	 his	 later	 years	 very	 slowly,
intermittently,	 and	 by	 beating	 around	 the	 bush,
began	to	move	in	this	direction.
Eurasianism	 is	 inevitable.	 Sooner	 or	 later
everyone	 will	 have	 to	 admit	 that.	 But	 Putin
heartily	says	‘yes’	to	this	major	tendency,	without
trying	to	shirk	it	or	act	as	if	he	is	merely	serving

time.	 With	 his	 eyes	 open,	 unblinking,	 he	 is
listening	to	the	call	of	our	history,	painstakingly
trying	to	catch	it.	And	even	if	he	accidentally	gets
carried	 away	 in	 the	 process,	 he	 should	 be
forgiven.	Putin	is	looking	for	a	way	out	of	the
precipice,	de	 profundis	 clamavi,
[39]
	 ‘out	 of	 the
depths	I	have	cried	[unto	Thee,	O	Lord]’.	His	eyes
are	sad,	as	Mamleev
[40]
	notes.	It	means	that	he	has
not	lost	the	chain	of	being;	it	means	that,	to	a
certain	 extent,	 he	 is	 an	 ontologist...	 Anyone
would	become	a	little	‘putin’	if	he	were	in	Putin’s
shoes.	It	seems	like	he	is	an	Old	Believer	by	birth.
There	 is	 a	 mystical	 diary	 written	 by	 the	 Old
Believer	 Anna	 Putina,	 consisting	 of	 famous
ancient	Russian	hieroglyphs	that	contain	a	cryptic
narration	about	the	forthcoming	secret	destiny	of
Russia	and	the	end	of	time.	It	all	fits...
Eurasianist	 tendencies	 will	 continue	 to	 grow
ever	stronger	with	Putin	in	power.	There	will	be
active	 relations	 with	 the	 Asian	 countries,	 and

Russia	 will	 cautiously	 start	 moving	 towards	 a
European	 policy	 as	 well.	 The	 integrationist
impulses	of	the	CIS	will	be	palpable,	especially	in
economics.	 Putin	 will	 prepare	 the	 most
favourable	conditions	for	Russia’s	return	to	the
global	arena	as	an	active	player.	Not	immediately,
but	‘trois	pas	en	avant,	deux	en	arriere,	tel	va	le
maître	aux	pieds	fondus’
[41]
	(as	apparently	said	by
Jean	 Richepin),
[42]
	 but	 he	 will	 reestablish	 the
deserved	power	and	dignity	of	Russia.
Circumstances	will	be	favourable	to	 us.	 The
US	 will	 proclaim	 that	 it	 will	 always	 have	 the
priority	in	international	affairs,	which	will	cool
down	 relations	 somewhat.	 That	 said,	 an	 anti-
American	mood	will	spread	all	over	the	world.
The	inevitable	collapse	of	the	dollar	is	not	far	off.
Russia	 must	 stand	 at	 the	 forefront	 of	 anti-
Americanism	and	lead	the	others.	When	the	US,
the	real	evil	empire,
[43]
	collapses,	we	will	help	the
victims	 and	 welcome	 refugees.	 Sooner	 or	 later

Carthage	will	be	destroyed,
[44]
	and	Putin	will	take
another	step	towards	the	realisation	of	this	dream.
I	 have	 participated	 in	 Russian	 politics	 for
many	 years.	 I	 am	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 Russian
politicians.	My	views	have	changed	somewhat	but
not	 so	 fast	 as	 those	 of	 the	 others.	 All	 other
people’s	 views	 are	 changing	 so	 drastically	 and
unpredictably	that,	forgive	me	for	saying	so,	it
seems	that	they	don’t	have	any	views	at	all.	Either
that	or	their	views	do	not	change	at	all,	against	all
odds,	 which	 is	 the	 same	 thing.	 I	 am	 the	 most
consistent	 Russian	 politician:	 I	 started	 with
traditionalism,
[45]
	the	Conservative	Revolution,
[46]
the	Third	Way,
[47]
	and	Eurasianism,	and	I	am	still
holding	the	same	line.	I	veered	to	the	Left	a	little
during	 the	 1990s,	 recognising	 the	 traditionalist
archaic	 aspect	 in	 socialism	 and	 Communism,
which	I	had	not	seen	until	socialism	fell.	After	the
collapse	of	the	Soviet	regime	I	turned	from	an

anti-Soviet	patriot	into	a	pro-Soviet	one.		
In	order	to	realise	my	worldview	I	travelled
through	 various	 political	 milieus,	 and	 I	 left	 a
significant	 trail	 everywhere	 I	 went.	 From	 the
national	patriot	movement	in	the	mid-1980s,	the
newspaper	Den	  (‘Day’),	  the	  Right-Left
opposition,	and	the	Front	of	National	Salvation,
[48]
up	to	my	participation	in	the	development	of	the
ideology	of	the	CPRF	(Communist	Party	of	the
Russian	Federation)	see	the	books	and	articles	by
Gennady	 Zyuganov,	 as	 whole	 passages	 in	 them
have	 been	 copied	 from	 my	 work);	 from	 my
association	 with	 the	 ideological	 project	 of
National	 Bolshevism
[49]
	 as	 represented	 by	 the
Limonovites
[50]
	(this	National	Bolshevist	ideology
was	 resurrected,	 updated,	 and	 ceremoniously
served	by	me	to	the	boorish	rogues	led	by	this
Parisian	 grandpa,	 who	 later	 reduced	 it	 to
primitivism	and	the	absurd)	to	my	creation	of	the
original	version	of	the	ideology	of	the	Party	of

Russia’s	Rebirth.
[51]
	In	the	process,	my	ideas	were
largely	 borrowed	 by	 the	 LDPR	 (Zhirinovsky’s
Liberal-Democratic	 Party	 of	 Russia)	 and	 Our
Home	—	Russia
[52]
	(in	a	more	‘civilised’	form),
as	well	as	Fatherland	—	All	Russia
[53]
	(I	published
two	 major	 conceptual	 articles	 in	 Luzhkov’s
magazine	Moya	Moskva,	whose	theses	Luzhkov
later	reiterated,	although	he	misquoted	them).
Today	 the	 members	 of	 Putin’s	 entourage	 -
minus	 a	 diminishing	 remnant	 of	 liberals	 -	 are
speaking	my	language.	True,	I	am	little-known,
but	only	because	thieves	never	reveal	the	sources
of	their	wealth.	I	think	this	is	self-evident.	The
Eurasia	Movement	which	I	am	leading	is	a	kind
of	intellectual	order,	and	a	scientific	laboratory.
More	 and	 more	 wealthy	 individuals	 have	 been
joining	us,	who	are	seriously	concerned	with	the
future	of	our	fatherland,	who	are	interested	in	the
models	of	development	being	put	into	practice	by

the	country	and	the	people	and	in	the	National
Idea,	 and	 who	 are	 aware	 of	 the	 practical
advantages	and	importance	of	Eurasianism.
Slowly,	 gradually,	 but	 inevitably	 we	 are
moving	 towards	 our	 goal.	 Previously,	 the
Eurasian	movement	in	contemporary	Russia	had
been	represented	solely	by	young	non-conformist
intellectuals.	 Today	 a	 significant	 layer	 of	 this
movement	 includes	 academics,	 businessmen,
industrialists,	law	enforcement	officers,	religious
men	 (Old	 Believers,	 Muslims,	 mystics,	 etc.),
administrative	 officials,	 journalists,	 oil	 traders,
and,	traditionally,	a	broad	segment	of	the	counter-
culture.
The	Conservative	Revolution	is	on	Its	Way
I	have	always	held	to	the	same	view:	Russia	must
be	 a	 strong	 state,	 prosperous,	 powerful,	 and
independent.	 We	 have	 to	 face	 many	 enemies
globally	and	our	principal	enemy	is	the	United

States	 of	 America,	 which	 makes	 no	 particular
secret	 of	 its	 hostile	 attitude	 towards	 Russian
civilisation.	 The	 US	 is	 the	 heir	 to	 the	 Anglo-
Saxon	empire,	and	we	spent	whole	centuries	in	a
geopolitical	 standoff	 with	 it.	 In	 earlier	 times,
when	 the	 Russian	 government	 veered	 towards
pro-American	 and	 pro-Western	 values,	 I	 was
among	 the	 patriotic	 opposition.	 But	 when	 the
government	changed	and	started	going	back	to	a
normal	course,	which	had	already	begun	prior	to
Putin,	such	as	when	Yevgeny	Primakov	had	been
appointed	Prime	Minister,	I	became	more	loyal	to
our	rulers.	The	appointment	of	Primakov	gave	me
new	hope.
As	 a	 patriot,	 when	 Putin	 arrived	 I	 was	 in	 a
festive	 mood.	 I	 had	 high	 hopes	 for	 Putin,
considering	 that	 he	 is	 a	 figure	 who	 had	 been
historically	  predetermined.	  The	  political
processes	 that	 had	 previously	 been	 unable	 to
manifest	 to	 an	 adequate	 degree	 became

‘normalised’	with	Putin.	They	include	Moscow’s
hard	line	with	Chechnya	and	the	signing	of	the
document	 that	 created	 the	 Eurasian	 Economic
Community	—	things	that	I	had	talked	about	for
many	years.	The	critical	point	came	with	Putin’s
statement	that	‘Russia	has	always	seen	itself	as	a
Eurasian	 country’
[54]
	 —	 all	 this	 fully	 coincides
with	my	stance.
With	 the	 emergence	 of	 Putin	 I	 finally
developed	 my	 worldview	 and	 ideological
position,	 coining	 the	 term	 ‘radical	 centre’.
Basically,	 it	 refers	 to	 centrism,	 but	 of	 the
Eurasian	type.	It	is	not	about	simple	submission
to	the	powers-that-be	but	about	constructive	and
active	cooperation	with	the	Eurasian	power	—	the
power	that	consciously	and	wilfully	moves	in	the
direction	that	I	had	urged	it	to	move	in	for	all
those	years	filled	with	hard	and	dramatic	struggle.
The	 only	 thing	 that	 remains	 from	 my	 previous
phase	is	radicalism.	The	role	of	my	radicalism	is

to	 establish	 Eurasian	 tendencies,	 ideas,	 and
projects	 with	 all	 possible	 passion,	 earnestness,
and	strenuousness.	Another	facet	of	my	centrist
radicalism	 is	 that	 I	 (contrary	 to	 today’s
conformists)	consider	Putin	to	be	unconditionally
good.	 If	 there	 are	 any	 negative	 aspects	 of	 his
presidency,	 I	 believe	 that	 they	 are	 totally
subordinate	to	his	positive	qualities,	to	the	extent
that	they	are	not	even	worth	noting.	Blemishes
disappear	naturally.	We	are	witnessing	now	what
is	gradually	happening	to	the	oligarchs,	who	had
been	an	eyesore.	They	turned	out	to	be	not	nearly
as	 scary	 as	 they	 seemed.	 And	 where	 is	 the
parochialism	of	the	republics	and	the	governors’
separatist	ambitions	now?	They	simply	vanished
into	thin	air.						
With	the	emergence	of	Putin,	the	powers-that-
be	finally	took	note	of	the	Eurasian	theory	and	the
idea	of	the	Third	Way.	Look	around	you.	Look	at
the	language	that	power	speaks	and	at	the	topics

that	are	being	discussed	in	the	media.	They	could
not	have	been	discussed	without	the	conceptual
layer	 represented	 by	 the	 Third	 Way	 —	 social,
geopolitical,	and,	finally,	economic.	It	began	and
was	introduced	by	this	humble	narrator.	The	proof
is	redundant.	Just	compare	the	current	situation
with	 the	 one	 20	 years	 ago,	 when	 these
developments	 were	 only	 in	 the	 making.	 Third
Way	concepts	are	getting	both	their	feet	firmly	on
the	ground.	It	is	another	matter	that	it	happened
not	 through	 one	 specific	 party	 but	 by	 way	 of
delegating	 certain	 ideas	 to	 different	 political
forces.	 In	 other	 words,	 the	 conservative
revolution
[55]
	 that	 traditionalist	 scholars	 had
written	 so	 much	 about	 is	 happening	 before	 our
very	eyes.	But	it	turned	out	to	be	a	revolution	not
from	 below	 but	 from	 above,	 without	 a	 clearly
defined	social	subject.	The	ideas	only	gradually
entered	our	consciousness.								
Look	what	the	CPRF	and	United	Russia
[56]
	are

talking	about	now	and	at	what	political	analysts
are	 writing,	 and	 then	 take	 a	 close	 look	 at	 the
Elements
[57]
	 anthology	 and	 at	 my	 textbooks	The
Foundations	of	Geopolitics	and	The	Foundations
of	Eurasianism,
[58]
	and	you	will	understand	where
these	symbols,	subjects,	and	terms	stem	from.	For
instance,	 note	 the	 origins	 of	 the	 words
‘mondialism’	(an	aspiration	to	unite	all	countries
under	one	global	government)	and	‘conspirology’
(a	 science	 dealing	 with	 conspiracy	 theories),
which	 I	 first	 introduced	 into	 the	 Russian
language.	 Those	 were	 simple	 loan	 words,	 but
today	they	have	been	fully	fleshed	out	and	have
been	 included	 in	 dictionaries.	 To	 quote	 the
remarkable	French	poet	Stéphane	Mallarmé,
[59]
	‘il
faut	changer	la	langue’	(‘one	has	to	change	the
language’)	and	you	will	change	the	world.	If	we
introduce	our	own	linguistic	rules,	it	will	result	in
the	 changing	 of	 reality.	 After	 all,	 man	 is	 a
linguistic	being,	inconceivable	without	language.

‘Language	is	the	house	of	being’,
[60]
	said	Martin
Heidegger.
Ideological	Evolution:	The	Eurasian
Perspective
Practically	all	of	the	concrete	and	highly	efficient
steps	that	were	undertaken	by	Putin	were	made	at
the	very	beginning	of	his	first	presidential	term,
in	 a	 dashing,	 unexpected,	 and	 rather	 tough
manner.	 This	 manner	 became	 his	 political
foundation.	Just	to	remind	you	of	what	we	had	at
that	 point:	 a	 liberal	 pro-Western	 elite,	 which
hated	 Russia	 with	 all	 its	 heart,	 and	 the	 people
which	it	dubbed	‘this	country’;	the	media,	divided
between	 scheming	 oligarchs	 who	 were	 waging
wars	against	each	other	over	the	people’s	and	the
government’s	 heads;	 the	 separatist	 hotbed	 in
Chechnya;	 the	 blossoming	 totalitarian	 Islamist
sects	 (the	 Wahhabis);	 the	 sovereignty	 of	 the
regional	 barons;	 and	 a	 deep	 schism	 in	 society.

The	country	was	on	the	verge	of	a	catastrophe:
disintegration,	 terror,	 civil	 war	 and	 chaos,	 and
society	 was	 stricken	 by	 apathy	 and	 silent
resentment,	while	a	grim,	odious	and	sick	tyrant
was	looming	above	it	all.												
Putin,	when	he	came	to	power,	gave	a	sharp
and	effective	answer	to	all	these	challenges.	He
stopped	the	expansion	of	the	Chechen	Wahhabi
separatists,	and	the	Russians	entered	Grozny.	He
took	the	major	media	out	of	the	hands	of	the	most
notorious	 oligarchs	 and	 placed	 them	 within	 the
limits	 of	 minimal	 loyalty	 to	 the	 state	 and	 its
people.	He	prevented	Russia’s	disintegration	into
‘appanage	principalities’
[61]
	where	the	leaders	of
the	 Fatherland	 —	 All	 Russia	 were	 leading	 it.
Putin	  reformed	  the	  Federation	  Council,
deliberately	 weakening	 it,	 and	 strengthened	 the
nation’s	territorial	integrity,	introducing	the	rigid
structure	 of	 the	 federal	 districts.	 He	 created	 a
better	social	atmosphere,	harmonised	the	sharpest

tensions	and	introduced	the	notion	of	‘fashionable
patriotism’.	He	cracked	down	on	the	totalitarian
religious	 sects.	 He	 suspended	 the	 seemingly
imminent	 disintegration	 of	 the	 nation	 and	 gave
the	people	a	chance	to	catch	their	breath.	This	is
the	basis	of	his	high	approval	ratings.	This	is	the
only	Putin	that	the	people	accept	and	support.
Another	 aspect	 is	 his	 foreign	 policy.	 Here
Putin	 followed	 two	 strategies	 at	 once:	 patriotic
rhetoric	and	his	vacillations	between	Europe	and
the	US.	Since	Russia	does	not	have	the	potential
for	a	fully-fledged	strategic	autarchy	of	its	own,
the	 important	 choice	 lies	 between	 cooperation
with	the	US	or	with	Europe.	Putin	was	indecisive
in	this	regard.	Since	Russia’s	strategic	interests,
from	 a	 geopolitical	 standpoint,	 belong	 in	 the
Russian-European	 strategic	 partnership,	 the
President	found	himself	in	a	 difficult	 situation.
The	 mighty	 US,	 using	 a	 carrot-and-stick
approach,	 tried	 to	 suppress	 Russia,	 whereas

indecisive	Europe	in	its	turn	lent	a	helping	hand
before	jerking	it	back.	Theoretically,	Putin	needed
to	take	a	consistently	Eurasian	line	and	stick	to	it
no	matter	what,	be	it	the	post-9/11	syndrome,	the
American	aggression	in	Iraq,	or	even	situations
that	arose	prior	to	these	events.	All	the	steps	he
took	 in	 the	 Eurasian	 direction	 —	 the
strengthening	of	relations	with	the	Asian	states,
the	 integration	 processes	 within	 EurAsEC,	 the
partnership	 with	 Europe,	 and	 so	 on	 	 	 can	 be
regarded	as	successful.	The	concessions	he	made
to	the	US	were	failures.
That	being	said,	I	have	to	admit	the	following:
Putin	 had	 been	 extremely	 lucky	 all	 this	 time.
Luck	is	a	very	curious	quality.	A	question	arose:
what	exactly	was	it	that	prevented	the	President
from	acting	to	the	full	extent	of	his	power?	I	have
formed	 an	 impression	 that	 Putin	 fought	 the
counterattacks	 of	 the	 victims	 of	 his	 reforms,
fighting	 a	 rear-guard	 action	 on	 the	 domestic

political	 front.	 These	 counterattacks	 were	 very
serious,	and,	to	a	large	extent,	Putin	had	to	stay
where	 he	 was	 or	 even	 step	 back	 a	 little	 on	 a
number	of	points.
After	 the	 quick	 victory	 over	 the	 Chechen
separatists,	 the	 operation	 assumed	 a	 protracted
character:	it	was	not	quite	a	war,	but	neither	was
it	a	victory.	Three	years	passed,	and	the	initially
besieged	rebellious	governors	resurfaced	among
the	 ranks	 of	 United	 Russia	 as	 if	 nothing	 had
happened,	 and,	 blackmailing	 the	 President	 with
their	 election	 issues,	 started	 to	 seek	 their	 own
profit.	The	federal	districts	proved	to	be	largely
inefficient	 and	 simply	 multiplied	 the	 ranks	 of
hollow	 bureaucrats.	 The	 radical	 Islamist	 sects
resumed	their	activities	and	spread	all	over	the
North	 Caucasus.	 ‘Patriotism’	 and	 conservatism
lacked	 any	 real	 substance	 and	 remained	 empty
slogans	  and	  claptrap.	  Genuine	  political
conciliation	 did	 not	 happen,	 and	 the	 Kremlin

administration	 was	 still	 ‘chasing	 Communists’
and	 engaging	 in	 PR.	 In	 other	 words,	 Putin	 not
only	failed	to	develop	and	finalise	his	endeavours,
but,	on	some	issues,	lost	the	positions	that	he	had
previously	occupied.
Why	 did	 it	 happen?	At	 first	 it	 seemed	 that
Putin	became	President	too	fast.	He	simply	did
not	 have	 enough	 time	 to	 back	 himself
ideologically,	 conceptually,	 in	 terms	 of	 his
entourage,	 or	 politically,	 as	 befits	 such	 a	 high
position.	This	severe	personnel	shortage	and	the
absence	of	new	blood	in	the	political	elite	played
an	enormous	role.	Putin’s	protégés	in	most	cases
proved	to	be	unable	to	handle	their	tasks	properly,
and	 as	 a	 result,	 the	 process	 of	 rotating	 the
members	 of	 the	 political	 elite	 came	 to	 a
standstill:	the	officials	who	had	held	office	before
Putin	 had	 been	 more	 efficient	 and	 had	 more
experience,	 but	 they	 belonged	 to	 a	 different
political	paradigm;	Putin’s	people	were	loosely-

knit	 and	 haphazard,	 and	 their	 personal	 loyalty
would	have	been	enough	only	if	the	President	had
had	 a	 clear	 ideological	 base	 or	 dictatorial
tendencies.	There	were	some	external	reasons	as
well:	 the	 pressure	 from	 the	 West	 reached
unprecedented	 heights.	 Any	 action	 aimed	 at
strengthening	 Russia’s	 position	 made	 the	 US
unhappy,	and	it	became	a	natural	rallying	point
for	all	the	internal	agents	of	Western	influence	as
well	 to	 the	 external	 levers	 of	 power,	 both
economic	and	political.
Putin	had	yet	to	create	a	new	political	system,
to	 implement	 fundamental	 reforms,	 to	 get	 the
creation	of	a	new	political	elite	going,	and	to	find
traces	of	an	actual	counter-elite	in	contemporary
Russian	society	that	he	could	draw	upon,	either	by
growing	it	artificially	or	by	redeploying	some	of
the	 more	 efficient	 managers	 into	 the	 state’s
political	sector.	Without	new	blood,	the	country
may	have	faced	a	collapse.

While	Putin	symbolises	a	respite,	his	place	in
history	is	uncertain.	I	am	convinced	that	Russia
has	only	one	future	—	the	Eurasian	way,	and	I
believe	that	Putin	can	only	realise	himself	as	a
Eurasian	President.	It	will	be	extremely	difficult
but	it	will	be	the	right	way.	

2.	Putin’s	Ideology
Putin	Owes	Us	All
Some	analysts	call	Putin	a	patriot,	others	call	him
a	 liberal.	 The	 question	 remains:	 ‘Who	 is	 Mr
Putin?’	 Who	 is	 he,	 after	 all?	 Who	 or	 what
influences	 his	 opinions?	 There	 are	 two	 factors
that	 Putin	 has	 to	 reckon	 with	 in	 his	 decision-
making.	 On	 the	 one	 hand,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to
sustain	a	high	level	of	credibility	domestically,
which	 manifests	 itself	 in	 high	 ratings,	 positive
public	opinion,	support	from	the	voters,	and	so
on.	On	the	other	hand,	there	are	external	factors:
support	 from	 the	 West,	 closer	 relations	 with
Europe	and	NATO,	and	adequate	performance	in
the	area	of	foreign	policy.	These	two	factors	are
intertwined	 in	 a	 complex	 way	 and	 are	 almost
inversely	proportional.

The	people	of	Russia	have	traditionally	been
expecting	a	tough	stance	from	Putin,	wishing	for
a	 stronger	 state,	 a	 patriotic	 orientation	 and	 the
pursuit	 of	 a	 national	 identity,	 as	 indicated	 by
numerous	 polls.	At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 outside
world,	 especially	 Europe	 and	 the	 US,	 wants
exactly	the	opposite:	the	introduction	of	dynamic
liberal	reforms,	the	establishment	of	pro-Western
values,	 and	 compliance	 with	 the	 norms	 of	 the
European	community.	According	to	the	Russian
Public	Opinion	Research	Centre,	71%	of	Russians
think	that	Russia	belongs	to	a	distinct,	‘Eurasian’
or	 Orthodox	 civilisation,	 and	 that	 therefore
development	in	a	pro-Western	direction	does	not
suit	the	country.	Only	13%	of	respondents	named
Russia	as	part	of	Western	civilisation.	As	liberal
reforms	 are	 progressing,	 the	 negative	 backlash
from	 patriotic	 voters	 (the	 so-called	 ‘Putin
majority’)	 is	 growing	 against	 Putin	 and	 his
actions.	Even	the	Western	press	takes	note	of	this:

‘What	makes	Putin	pursue	an	aggressively	pro-
Western	policy	at	a	time	when	most	of	his	people
do	not	want	anything	of	the	kind?’	asked	the	Los
Angeles	Times.
[62]
The	Liberalism	of	the	Between-election
Cycle
Having	 been	 elected	 with	 the	 help	 of	 patriotic
slogans,	Vladimir	Putin	took	advantage	of	the	so-
called	 ‘between-election	 period’	 and	 acted	 in	 a
liberal	vein,	scoring	many	points	with	the	West.
Apparently,	Putin	reckoned	on	the	balance	of	the
two	 vectors,	 not	 simply	 on	 a	 dogmatic
‘patriotism’	or	an	equally	dogmatic	‘liberalism’.
In	 the	 process,	 the	 positions	 of	 the	 so-called
‘Orthodox	Chekists’
[63]
	(patriotism)	strengthened
as	 the	 next	 elections	 approached.	 His	 midterm
was	a	kind	of	peak	in	liberalism,	after	which,	as
the	elections	draw	nearer,	his	liberal	pro-Western
inclinations	tended	to	give	way	to	the	patriotic

side.	Accordingly,	 the	 balance	 of	 power	 in	 the
Kremlin	changed,	namely	toward	empire-building
initiatives,	 advocacy	 for	 a	 strong	 state,	 and
increased	momentum,	which	is	also	reflected	in
the	strengthening	of	certain	groups	at	the	expense
of	other	groups.
In	order	to	maintain	his	strong	position	as	the
leader	of	the	State,	Putin	has	always	striven	to
keep	 the	 pre-election	 balance	 in	 his	 political
practice	 at	 71%	 patriotism	 and	 13%	 liberalism
(strictly	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 Russian	 Public
Opinion	 Research	 Centre’s	 results).	 This
guaranteed	his	easy	re-election.	During	all	four
years	of	Putin’s	second	presidential	term	(as	well
as	during	Medvedev’s	presidency)	we	observed	a
reverse	situation,	where	71%	of	the	state	policy
was	 oriented	 toward	 the	 West	 and	 13%	 leaned
toward	patriotism.
The	Peter	Chekists	—	the	Myth	Unrealised

That	 having	 been	 said,	 the	 patriotic	 pro-state
ideology	 is	 a	 very	 vague	 category.	 The	 Peter
Guys,	 as	 an	 actual	 group	 of	 proponents	 of	 this
ideology,	does	not	exist	as	such.	There	are	various
personalities	from	Saint	Petersburg	who	are	close
to	Putin,	but	we	do	not	observe	an	alliance	on	the
grounds	of	common	viewpoints.	The	myth	about
the	 ‘Orthodox	 Chekists’	 appears	 to	 me	 to	 have
been	a	newspaper	hoax.	Past	association	with	the
secret	 service	 does	 not	 in	 itself	 constitute	 an
ideology.	 It	 is	 rather	 a	 style,	 a	 type,	 which	 in
certain	 situations	 may	 accommodate	 different
belief	 systems,	 both	 patriotic	 and	 liberal	 pro-
Western.	It	should	be	noted	that	the	authors	of	the
‘patriotic	doctrine’	from	Putin’s	entourage,	who
are	considered	to	be	the	‘Orthodox	Chekists’,	are
not	yet	backed	by	any	ideological	think	tank	or
serious	intellectual	group.	Besides,	in	their	ersatz
blueprints	 they	 keep	 relying	 on	 the	 traditional
community	 of	 liberal	 spin	 doctors	 who

ultimately,	 with	 careful	 reservations,	 call	 for
globalisation	and	defend	liberal	reforms	adapted
to	 Russian	 conditions,	 which	 is	 not	 exactly
patriotic	and	not	at	all	Orthodox.	And,	vice	versa,
the	group	in	power,	which	is	not	from	Peter	at	all,
has	 lately	 bolstered	 the	 process	 of	 the
development	of	patriotic	and	ideological	projects.
In	 my	 opinion,	 the	 authorities	 today	 are	 more
pragmatic	than	ever.	There	is	virtually	no	one	in
power	 who	 has	 any	 distinct,	 colourful	 and
consistent	 convictions,	 apart	 from	 the	 ultra-
Atlanticist	Chubais.	But	the	need	for	ideology	is
there,	 so	 somebody	 will	 eventually	 step	 in	 and
deal	 with	 this:	 if	 not	 sympathisers,	 then
pragmatists.
A	 liberal	 course	 always	 reveals	 its	 negative
aspects,	 be	 it	 the	 people’s	 dissatisfaction	 with
housing	 and	 utility	 reform,	 the	 monetisation	 of
benefits,	rising	fuel	tariffs,	the	liberalisation	of
natural	monopolies	or	anything	of	that	kind.	In

addition,	 a	 Western-oriented	 course	 will
ultimately	 prove	 futile.	 This	 strengthens	 the
importance	of	the	patriotic	factor:	if	Putin	does
not	use	it,	all	dividends	will	go	to	the	opposition.
Given	the	powerful	potential	of	patriotism,	which
served	as	a	basis	for	Putin’s	first	election,	this
potential	 has	 still	 not	 acquired	 a	 clear-cut
political	shape.	Today	the	institutions	capable	of
offering	 an	 adequate	 political	 and	 ideological
backing	 to	 Vladimir	 Putin	 are	 virtually	 non-
existent.	There	is	a	group	which	proclaimed	itself
‘the	party	in	power’	in	the	form	 of	 the	 United
Russia	party,	but	politically	and	ideologically	it	is
full	of	problems.	This	party	has	been	diluted	by
extremely	diverse	characters,	both	Left	and	Right,
regional	  rebels	  and	  pro-state	  officials,
charismatic	politicians	and	humble	civil	servants.
But	 United	 Russia	 is	 not	 so	 much	 a	 political
supporter	as	a	barometer	of	Putin’s	own	election
prospects,	 and	 this	 does	 not	 make	 his	 life	 any

easier.	 I	 do	 not	 consider	 that	 a	 party	 such	 as
United	Russia	is	capable	of	taking	on	any	sort	of
coherent	 ideology	 (which	 has	 yet	 to	 be
developed),	nor	of	giving	Vladimir	Vladimirovich
Putin	 additional	 support.	 It	 is	 something	 more
along	the	lines	of	a	preventive	measure	against
rebelliousness,	 as	 well	 as	 an	 administrative
resource	complying	with	the	party	line.	This	is	a
good	 start,	 but	 far	 from	 sufficient.	 I	 think	 that
Eurasianism	 will	 deal	 with	 the	 problem	 of
ideology	 much	 more	 successfully;	 it	 has
gradually	 become	 a	 very	 popular	 doctrine:	 it
combines	conservatism	with	a	certain	openness,
being	a	kind	of	‘scientific	patriotism’	based	on
geopolitics.	 I	 am	 sceptical	 towards	 attempts	 to
inculcate	 the	 Eurasian	 idea	 into	 the	 patented
‘party	 of	 power’.	 That’s	 why	 the	 idea	 of	 an
independent	‘Eurasia’	party	was	born	some	time
ago	—	a	pro-Putin	patriotic	party	with	a	distinct
ideology.

The	Strengths	of	the	Eurasian	Ideology
One	 strength	 of	 Eurasianism	 is	 that	 it	 is
applicable	 to	 foreign	 policy.	 The	 Eurasia
Movement	from	its	outset	made	it	a	principal	aim
to	create	a	Eurasian	union	as	a	direct	equivalent
to	the	European	Union.
While	we	pursue	closer	relations	with	Eastern
countries	 we	 also	 support	 tighter	 links	 with
Europe.	 This	 is	 what	 Eurasianism	 is	 all	 about.
Other	types	of	Putin	supporters	are	doomed	to	be
a	pale	shadow	of	the	pragmatism	of	his	external
policy,	 which	 drastically	 limits	 room	 for
manoeuvre.	 	 As	 for	 relations	 with	 the	 US,
Eurasianism	 by	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 its	 ideology
cannot	 look	 to	 them	 for	 partners.	 Of	 all	 the
political	 forces	 in	 the	 US	 we	 only	 support	 the
isolationist	Republicans	because	they	are	calling
for	 the	 US	 to	 stop	 sponsoring	 globalisation,
concentrate	 on	 internal	 problems	 and	 leave	 the

rest	 of	 the	 world	 in	 peace.	 At	 the	 same	 time,
Eurasianism	 believes	 that	 the	 future	 of	 Russia
depends	on	an	efficient	conclusion	of	a	series	of
strategic	alliances	with	the	states	of	the	‘coastal
zone’	—	from	Europe	through	the	Arabic	world	to
Asia	and	the	Far	East.	Pragmatism	cannot	be	the
content	 of	 a	 specific	 policy.	 It	 always	 operates
within	certain	limits	and	must	leave	room	for	its
practical	 operation.	 For	 Putin	 it	 is	 extremely
important	to	have	both	the	loyal	Atlanticist	party
flank	 and	 the	 equally	 loyal	 Eurasian	 one.	 This
combination	 will	 give	 him	 a	 free	 hand	 in	 any
manoeuvre.	The	Atlanticists	are	doing	well	today
but	 the	 vagueness	 and	 disjointedness	 of
Eurasianism	 is	 being	 fully	 exploited	 by	 the
opposition,	 but	 it	 is	 precisely	 Eurasianism	 that
can	 help	 not	 only	 to	 improve	 the	 domestic
situation	in	the	country	but	also	to	make	foreign
policy	much	more	consequent	and	effective.							
At	the	beginning	of	his	first	term	Putin	had	to

grapple	with	what	he	had	inherited.	He	came	to
power	at	a	critical	point	in	our	national	history
and	 neither	 he	 nor	 society	 as	 a	 whole	 fully
understood	 what	 had	 happened.	 What	 are	 we?
Where	 should	 we	 go?	 Where	 are	 our	 enemies?
Where	 are	 our	 friends?	 Does	 Russia	 have	 any
friends	 at	 all?	 But	 I	 think	 that	 Vladimir
Vladimirovich	 Putin	 owes	 us	 all:	 the	 Russian
people,	 the	 country,	 and	 its	 history.	 Putin’s
mission	is	to	create	in	Russia	a	stable	political
regime,	consistent	with	Russian	national	interests,
the	interests	of	its	people	and	the	priorities	of	our
geopolitics.	And	 only	 then	 may	 he	 think	 about
retirement.	The	current	balance	is	deceptive	and
very	fragile.	It	only	exists	at	all	thanks	to	Putin.
Preferably	it	should	be	able	to	stand	on	its	own	on
the	 basis	 of	 the	 political	 system	 and	 its
mentalities.	 Creating	 an	 adequate,	 subtle	 and
elaborate	 policy	 in	 the	 area	 of	 nation-building,
patriotism	and	the	National	Idea	is,	arguably,	the

most	 important	 mission,	 and	 it	 can	 only	 be
accomplished	by	Putin.	As	for	us,	we	will	do	our
best	to	help	him	with	this.
Ideological	Expertise	of	the	Political
Environment
In	 order	 to	 assess	 the	 political	 environment	 in
which	Putin	started	to	operate,	let	me	begin	with
some	general	definitions.	One	should	differentiate
the	ideological	leanings	of	the	population	(which
are	sometimes	very	obscure),	the	party	forces	and
the	 political	 leaders.	 In	 contemporary	 Russia
relations	between	the	above	are	very	strange,	and
are	of	a	‘dialectical’	type.	In	terms	of	intuitive
sympathy	the	following	groupings	can	be	singled
out:	patriotic	and	non-patriotic,	that	is,	liberal.	In
recent	 years	 the	 balance	 shifted	 dramatically
towards	 patriotism,	 although	 the	 power	 elite,
mass	media	and	community	of	experts	are	still
comprised	 of	 people	 with	 a	 rather	 squeamish

attitude	towards	our	country	and	our	people.	This
is	 an	 apparent	 imbalance:	 the	 mainstream
attitudes	 are	 markedly	 nationalistic,	 something
that	 is	 shared	 by	 Vladimir	 Putin	 and	 his	 close
circle,	but	the	political	paradigms	remain	liberal
to	a	significant	degree.	One	can	discern	a	certain
paradox	here:	the	slow	rotation	of	speechwriters
or	 of	 their	 gradual	 adaptation	 to	 the	 changing
situation	has	long	forced	Putin	to	use	a	strange
language:	 he	 has	 been	 trying	 to	 voice	 the
national-statist	ideas	using	liberal	jargon.
Whatever	  the	  case,	  politically	  the
overwhelming	majority	of	the	population	today	is
favourably	disposed	towards	Russia’s	return	as	a
superpower.	 How	 can	 these	 sympathies	 be
categorised?	 The	 intuitive	 —	 apolitical,
middlebrow	  —	  superpower	  sympathisers
recognise	one	of	their	own	in	Putin.	In	this	case
the	 superpower	 orientation	 coincides	 with
political	centrism.	This	gives	Putin	more	support:

it	is	as	if	he	unites	both	nationalist	sentiments	and
centrist	conformism.
Then	there	are	the	more	politicised	superpower
supporters.	The	Left-wing	ones	are	in	a	certain
opposition	to	Putin.	They	are	the	CPRF	and	A	Just
Russia.
[64]
	But	this	opposition	—	‘superpowerism’
against	‘superpowerism’	—	weakens	the	position
of	 the	 Communists,	 who	 had	 been	 previously
consolidated	against	the	overt	Russophobia	of	the
Yeltsin	regime.	It	appears	that	a	portion	of	the
Left-wing	 patriotic	 electorate	 can	 under	 certain
conditions	 be	 incorporated	 into	 the	 pro-Putin
movement.	 Zyuganov	 represents	 the	 dogmatic
core	of	this	sector	but	it	seems	to	me	people	are
starting	to	get	tired	of	him.
Then	 there	 are	 the	 ‘semi-superpowerist’
liberals.	 These	 are	 former	 radical	 pro-Western
reformers,	who	came	to	the	pragmatic	conclusion
that	they	could	not	go	on	as	they	had	due	to	the
prospect	 of	 their	 ultimate	 collapse.	 They

reluctantly	 and	 disgustedly	 took	 to	 Russian
superpower	  slogans,	  stressing	  ‘economic
liberalisation’	  (The	  Right	  Cause)
[65]
	  or
‘humanitarian	   democracy’	   (Yabloko,
[66]
Yavlinsky).	This	electorate	is	not	owned	by	the
Right	 either	 and	 is	 likely,	 under	 certain
conditions,	 to	 support	 Putin.	 However,	 this
electorate	is	very	small	in	size.
The	 above	 are	 followed	 by	 the	 lumpen
superpower	 supporters,	 people	 with	 bad	 taste,
petty	criminals,	and	political	imbeciles	—	they
are	  the	  congregation	  of	  the	  LDPR.
Superpowerism	  is	  filtered	  here	  through
aggressive,	 stupid,	 albeit	 sometimes	 biting,
humour.	 This	 is	 the	 audience	 of	 the	 TV	 shows
Okna
[67]
	 or	Prozhektorperiskhilton,
[68]
	 but	 more
politically	inclined.	They	have	ersatz	patriotism
and	 superpowerism	 as	 a	 disease.	 They	 can
partially	 support	 Putin	 if	 a	 couple	 of	 his	 spin
doctors	 decide	 to	 use	 a	 patriotic	 agenda	 in	 his

election	campaign.
And	finally	there	are	dogmatic	superpowerists.
These	are	marginal	ultra-patriots,	skinheads,	and
everyday	 racists.	 This	 sector	 is	 colourful	 and
brutal,	 but	 totally	 disjointed	 politically,	 its
leaders	 being	 petty	 maniacs	 with	 atrophied
muscles.	 As	 an	 electorate	 they	 are	 of	 little
importance,	 but	 they	 are	 useful	 as	 a	 good
argument	in	the	PR	campaigns	that	superpower
opponents	 wage	 against	 superpower	 supporters.
Who	 skinheads	 and	 ultra-nationalists	 will
ultimately	vote	for	is	not	important.	Most	likely,
on	the	night	prior	to	the	election	they	will	drink
one	too	many	and	not	make	it	to	the	ballot-boxes.
The	final	group	is	the	anti-superpower	liberals.
They	 are	 represented	 by	Novaya	 Gazeta,
[69]
	 the
human	rights	movements,	the	economic	sector	of
the	 government,	 the	 oligarchs,	 the	 liberal
hallucinations	 of	 Chubais,	Ekho	 Moskvy,
[70]

Kasparov,
[71]
	 Venediktov,
[72]
	 the	 homosexual
faction	in	the	State	Duma,	and	numerous	other
well-known	media	personalities.	Today	they	have
a	 tiny	 electorate	 which	 can	 be	 ignored	 as	 a
statistical	fluctuation	(it	is	known	that	a	relatively
large	 percentage	 of	 voters	 in	 Russia	 tick	 the
wrong	boxes	in	the	ballots	due	to	stress	or	poor
eyesight).	 The	 liberal	 electorate	 is	 almost	 non-
existent.	They	are	of	course	against	Putin	but	he
can	disregard	them.	On	the	other	hand,	liberals
still	occupy	strong	positions	among	the	political
elite	—	in	inverse	proportion	to	their	support	in
society.		Since	they	have	the	support	of	external
forces,	they	may	inflict	serious	harm	on	Putin	and
the	 country,	 something	 they	 are	 unfortunately
engaging	in	with	some	degree	of	success.
So,	what	do	we	have	here?	Putin	as	a	Russian
superpower	 supporter	 —	 without	 going	 into
details	about	whether	he	is	Right-wing,	Left-wing
or	of	any	other	denomination	—	is	theoretically

able	 to	 select	 his	 electorate	 from	 a	 huge	 field,
significantly	 surpassing	 United	 Russia	 in	 size.
This	 scenario	 was	 attempted	 under	 the	 All-
Russian	People’s	Front
[73]
	project,	but	behind-the-
scenes	struggles	over	the	control	of	this	image-
making	tool	has	so	far	prevented	it	from	being
successfully	realised.
Any	 shift,	 albeit	 minimal,	 by	 Putin	 from
liberalism	to	socialism	will	be	accompanied	by	a
positive	leap	in	his	ratings,	unless	it	gets	falsified
by	 the	 staff	 of	Ekho	Moskvy	 or	 their	 relatives,
who	will	be	scared	stiff.	This	can	be	explained	by
the	fact	that	in	the	realm	of	economic	sympathies
there	 is	 no	 necessary	 connection	 between	 them
and	 purely	 political	 sympathies.	 Liberalism	 is
attractive	to	a	very	small	group	of	people	and	if	it
is	still	in	favour	with	them,	it	is	simply	because
many	 of	 them	 still	 don’t	 understand	 what	 it	 is
about.	When	they	do,	they	will	indignantly	stay
away	 from	 it	 even	 if	 it	 gets	 dressed	 up	 in

superpower	language.	And,	vice	versa,	Left-wing
ideas	such	as	social	justice	and	the	welfare	state
have	a	huge	number	of	supporters	—	among	both
CPRF	 die-hards	 and	 those	 who	 have	 not	 yet
chosen	which	party	to	join.	Putin’s	appeal	to	this
niche	will	be	very	fruitful	from	the	point	of	view
of	an	election	strategy.	It	will	not	weaken	but	add
more	 meaning	 to	 his	 status	 as	 a	 superpower
supporter.
As	for	the	age	demographics	of	the	electorate,
it	 has	 until	 recently	 been	 dominated	 by
pensioners,	 the	 elderly,	 the	 infirm	 and	 socially
disadvantaged	 people	 —	 the	 ‘dispossessed
majority’.	The	election	is	the	only	day	when	they
feel	 needed	 and	 when	 they	 can	 express
themselves.	 They	 will	 determine	 the	 outcome.
Needless	to	say,	90%	of	them	are	superpower	and
welfare	state	supporters.	If	they	realise	(which	is
very	unlikely)	that	Putin’s	main	 ideologues	 are
Right-wing	liberals,	the	sight	will	not	be	pretty,

because	 liberalism	 is	 not	 very	 popular	 among
them,	 to	 say	 the	 least.	 This	 much-needed
electorate	is	joined	by	middle-aged	civil	servants
and	state	employees.	They	also	have	superpower
and	centrist	sympathies,	but	a	certain	Left-wing
inclination	 is	 also	 noticeable	 among	 them.
Owners	of	small	businesses	that	are	sick	of	the
situation	 also	 join	 this	 coalition.	 The	 clean-cut
centrists	 have	 high	 hopes	 for	 the	 Army,	 the
hospitals	and	the	‘economic	principalities’	of	the
oligarchs	(like	Norilsk),
[74]
	who	always	vote	for
the	party	in	power,	for	obvious	reasons.	Young
people	 don’t	 vote	 at	 all,	 or	 very	 marginally,
because	they	are	not	part	of	Russia’s	political	life.
Which	leads	us	to	the	following	conclusion:	the
majority	 will	 support	 Putin,	 the	 Left-wing
superpower	 supporter.	 But	 if	 they	 become
seriously	 confused,	 the	 electorate	 will	 support
even	other	Putins.

Putin’s	Formula:	Evolution	of	a
Political	Image
The	 Putin	 phenomenon	 is	 a	 phenomenon	 of
political	science,	functionality	and,	to	a	certain
extent,	image-making.	The	question	‘Who	is	Mr
Putin?’
[75]
	has	been	formulated	in	English	for	a
reason	and	it	was	circulated	in	English,	becoming
a	 cliché.	 In	 the	 Russian	 context	 there	 is	 no
question	 of	 «Кто	Вы,	господин	Путин?»,
[76]
because	the	Russians	themselves	understand	that
in	the	Putin	phenomenon	his	personality	is	either
insignificant	or	has	been	purposely	hidden,	or	has
not	yet	revealed	itself.	There	is	no	use	toying	with
a	metaphysical	question	such	as	what	is	Putin’s
personality	 like.	 Is	 it	 there	 at	 all?	 That	 is	 not
relevant	for	us	now:	from	the	point	of	view	of
political	 science	it	 is	 almost	 irrelevant.	 Putin
does	not	have	a	personal	political	portrait	either:
he	came	to	the	top	following	a	call	from	above,

skipping	over	whole	flights	of	stairs.	He	had	no
significant	importance	in	politics,	the	party	or	the
apparatus;	 he	 became	 the	 top	 official	 without
relying	on	any	consolidated	teams,	authorities	or
social	 strata.	 ‘He	 who	 was	 nobody,	 became
everything.’
[77]
All	 Putin’s	 decisions	 are	 based	 on	political
logic.	They	are	free	from	the	voluntarist	aspect
which	 was	 dominant	 with	 Yeltsin.	 The	 proof:
absence	 of	 a	 team.	 Russian	 politologists	 have
artificially	removed	the	factor	of	the	Peter	Guys
in	their	confrontation	with	the	Yeltsin	Family.
[78]
Putin’s	 absence	 of	 voluntarism	 was	 hastily
attributed	 to	 the	 counterbalancing	 of	 the	 two
teams.	 But	there	are	no	teams.	 The	Peter	Guys
and	  the	Family	 Guys	 are	 so	 intertwined,
standalone	 and	 devoid	 of	 common	 corporate,
economic,	political	and	other	goals,	that	trying	to
single	these	groups	out	is	a	mere	convention,	if
not	disinformation.	Its	purpose	is	to	try	to	explain

the	weakness	of	Putin’s	voluntarism	in	familiar
terms.	And	 voluntarism	 has	 been	 so	 typical	 of
Russian	 history	 that	 it	 is	 hard	 to	 imagine	 its
weakness,	let	alone	absence.
Putin’s	personnel	policy	proves	the	correctness
of	 this	 thesis.	After	 coming	 to	 power,	 the	 new
President,	in	fact,	did	not	carry	out	any	rotation
of	 personnel,	 which	 had	 been	 expected	 and
predicted	 by	 everybody.	 The	 almost	 three-year-
long	 wait	 for	 the	 resignation	 of	 Voloshin	 was
reminiscent	 of	Waiting	 for	 Godot	 by	 Samuel
Beckett.			
Nationalism	Plus	Liberalism
From	the	outset	Putin	embodied	the	politological
formula:	nationalism	(patriotism)	plus	liberalism
(economic	 reform).	 This	 formula	 became	 the
staple	of	the	Putin	phenomenon.	It	matters	more
than	his	personality.	One	can	argue	that	in	this
case	it	was	his	personality	that	was	chosen	to	suit

the	 formula	 and	 not	 the	 other	 way	 around.	 In
order	to	understand	this	formula,	one	has	to	go
back	to	the	political	scheme	which	underlay	the
logic	of	the	political	processes	of	the	1990s.	After
the	 collapse	 of	 the	 Soviet	 system	 two	 forces
became	clearly	dominant	in	Russian	politics:	pro-
Western	 liberals	 (reformers)	 and	 non-liberal
nationalists	(conservatives,	mostly	represented	by
Communists	and	socialists).	After	the	1991	coup
the	  pro-Western	  liberals	  seized	  control
(exploiting	 the	 authoritarian	 nature	 of	Yeltsin),
the	 economy	 (the	 Chubais	 and	 Gaidar
[79]
government),	the	media	(Poptsov,
[80]
	Berezovsky,
Yakovlev,
[81]
	 Gusinsky),	 and	 the	 intelligentsia,
and	  set	  about	  elaborating	  the	  norms
(constitutionally	protected	andimplicit)	of	liberal-
democratic	political	correctness.	The	formula	of
this	period	was	‘market	plus	the	West’	and	it	was
accompanied	 by	 a	 negative	 attitude	 towards
Russia,	 its	 people,	 its	 history	 and	 its	 national

identity.	 The	 victorious	 power	 was	 in	 the
minority.
At	 the	 other	 end	 there	 was	 the	majority
opposition	with	  an	  opposite	  ideology:
‘Communism	plus	nationalism’	(the	Red-Browns).
They	 represented	 the	 majority	 beyond	 the
confines	 of	 political	 correctness.	 The	 majority
was	discriminated	against	and	separated	from	the
uppermost	 authorities,	 the	 economy	 and	 the
media.	This	system	was	very	unstable	and	existed
to	a	large	extent	thanks	to	the	authoritarian	style
of	 Yeltsin	 and	 his	 supporters	 among	 the
politicians	and	oligarchs.	Basically,	it	was	a	kind
of	liberal	dictatorship.
Throughout	 the	 1990s	 this	 system	 shifted
towards	 a	less	severe	confrontation.	After	1993
the	 ruling	 elite,	 enjoying	 the	 privileges	 of	 the
victor,	did	not	engage	in	any	full	scale	repression
and	the	Red-Browns	did	not	end	up	completely
eliminated.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 certain	 disparate

elements	of	the	losers’	ideology		were	included	in
the	winners’	discourse.	After	this	crucial	moment
power	 started	moving	 away	 from	 its	 initial
formula	—	‘market	+	the	West’.	In	the	second
half	 of	 the	 1990s	 some	 democratic	 politicians
started	 to	 play	 with	 the	prevalent	 mood	 of	 the
masses	(nationalism	plus	sociality).	This	 led	 to
the	 Luzhkov-Primakov	 coalition	 (and,	 more
broadly,	Fatherland	—	All	Russia).	Here	we	can
already	 discern	 the	 ‘non-liberalism	 plus
nationalism’	formula	in	a	moderately	enlightened
form.	 Evgeny	 Primakov	 became	an	 emblematic
figure	of	this	trend	who	was	seemingly	destined
to	 succeed,	 in	 contrast	 with	 the	 weakening
Yeltsin.	A	  simple	  continuation	  of	  the
authoritarian	 liberal-democratic	 Yeltsinism	 was
not	enough	to	stop	this	trend,	which	was	gearing
up	 to	 unite	 with	 the	 Red-Brown	 masses	 at	 a
certain	point.
And	 that	 is	 when	 the	 Putin	 formula,

‘liberalism	 +	 nationalism’,	 was	 born.	 Its	 real
author	 is	 unknown	 to	 me:	 among	 its	 alleged
authors	 are	 Boris	 Berezovsky,	 Gleb	 Pavlovsky,
Vladislav	Surkov,	and	so	on.	This	position	was
situated	strictly	between	the	liberal	elite	and	the
nationally-	 and	 socially-inclined	 masses.	 It
effectively	 released	 the	 enormous	 tensions
between	 the	 social	 and	 political	 worlds.	 The
uniting	element	between	the	elite	and	the	masses
is	nationalism,	the	separating	element	is	still	the
liberal	economy.	From	the	very	beginning	Putin
communicated	only	this	formula	and	nothing	else.
Disregarding	the	nuances,	he	adhered	strictly	to
this	position.	It	was	a	formula	of	public	consensus
and	 it	 gradually	 became	 a	preferred	 criteria	 of
political	correctness.	Only	the	‘ultras’	were	left
behind:	the	ultra-liberals,	ultra-Yeltsinists,	ultra-
Westerners,	ultra-nationalists,	ultra-Communists,
and	the	uneducated	Red-Browns.	Putin	promptly
marginalised	 these	 forces:	 some	 were	 exiled

(Gusinsky,	  Berezovsky);	  others	  resigned
(Yumashev,
[82]
	Voloshin);	some	were	imprisoned
(Khodorkovsky);	others	were	dissolved	(Russian
National	Unity	[RNU],
[83]
	the	National	Bolshevik
Party	 [NBP]);	 some	 turned	 into	 buffoons
(Nemtsov,
[84]
	 Kasyanov),
[85]
	 and	 others	 were
forgotten	 (Gaidar,	 Novodvorskaya).
[86]
	 In	 the
political	sphere	Putin	established	new	 limits	 of
political	 correctness	 which	 stemmed	 from	 his
formula.	 From	 then	 on	market	 orientation	 and
patriotism,	 defined	 very	 broadly,	 became	 the
staples	of	loyalty,	the	basis	of	the	ersatz	ideology
of	the	Putin	era.
Putin	as	the	Conductor	of	Liberal	Reform:
Oligarchs	—	Separating	Functions
Putin’s	economic	policy	was	initially	designed	in
a	strict	liberal	fashion.	Putin	did	not	allow	even	a
hint	of	socialist	measures.	Actually,	this	is	what
sets	 him	 distinctly	 apart	 from	 the	economic

populism	of	Primakov	and	Luzhkov.	All	the	key
personalities	 in	 the	 economy	 were	 distinctly
liberal:	Gref,
[87]
	Chubais,	Kudrin,
[88]
	Illarionov.
[89]
In	this	respect	Putin	is	very	consistent	and	harsh
(we	 are	 not	 yet	 discussing	 the	 advantages	 and
disadvantages	 of	 liberalism	 as	 such).	 From	 a
sociological	 point	 of	 view,	 the	 potential	 of	 the
masses’	optimistic	attitude	towards	liberal	reform
was,	for	a	time,	exhausted	and	was	consolidating
only	the	marginal	electorate	of	the	SPS.	In	United
Russia	 the	 liberal	 element	 is	 not	 obvious.	 Its
electorate	 is	 consolidated	 under	 a	 different
principle	—	‘power	+	obscure	patriotism’,	and	it
contains	 very	 little	 of	 reform	 and	 market
orientation.	 Nevertheless,	 during	 his	 first	 two
terms	Putin	pursued	a	tough	anti-populist	line	in
economics	in	accordance	with	his	formula.	This	is
a	distinctive	aspect	of	his	formula,	and	he	follows
it	strictly	and	consistently.
The	Yeltsin	 period	 was	 characterised	 by	 the

fact	 that	 the	 main	subjects	 of	 political	 and
economic	 life	 were	 Russian	 oligarchs	 who
concentrated	in	their	hands	the	strands	of	power
over	 the	political	 sphere,	 the	 media	 and	 the
economy.	 They	 also	 largely	 mastered	 the
prevailing	 ‘ideology’,	 controlling	 and	 financing
teams	of	experts	(those	that	were	not	financed	by
Western	intelligence	agencies,	that	is).	Besides,
the	 activity	 of	 law	 enforcement	 ministries	 and
agencies	 was	 to	 some	 extent	 controlled	 by	 the
mechanisms	of	corruption,	which	were	ultimately
managed	by	the	oligarchs.
The	oligarchs	were	the	principal	actors	of	the
politics	 at	 the	 time,	 capable	 of	 proposing	 both
sociopolitical	and	economic	projects,	as	well	as
of	 building	 the	 mechanisms	 and	 generating
resources	 for	 their	 implementation.	 They	 were
legitimised	 by	Yeltsin’s	 individual	 voluntarism.
But	 this	 voluntarism	 was	 only	 a	necessary
requirement	 for	 the	 realisation	 of	 this	 or	 that

undertaking,	  and	  without	  the	sufficient
requirement	—	involvement	of	the	oligarchs	and
the	enforcement	of	this	undertaking.	As	a	result,
Yeltsin’s	 initiatives	 consistently	 failed.	 The
oligarchs	were	the	crucial	instrument	in	pre-Putin
Russia.	Everything	that	happened	was	sanctioned
and	 controlled	 by	 them.	 Not	 a	 single	 political
project	 was	 implemented	 without	 them:	 the
election	of	Putin	and	Unity
[90]
	is	not	an	exception.
When	he	came	to	power,	Putin	abolished	this
model	and	put	the	oligarchs	at	arm’s	length	from
each	other.	He	not	only	replaced	some	oligarchs
with	 others,	 he	denied	them	the	continuation	of
their	 functional	 involvement	 in	 the	 political
system.	 Two	 oligarchs,	 who	 were	 the	 fullest
embodiment	of	the	integrity	of	the	oligarchs’	role
—	 control	 over	 the	 media,	 the	 economy	 and
politics;	strength	of	will,	strategising,	corruption
in	the	secret	service	—	were	forced	out	of	the
country.	The	rest	of	them	sought	a	compromise

with	the	President.
What	did	Putin	offer	in	place	of	oligarchy?	An
oligarch	was	the	sum	of	several	components:	his
economic	 role	 was	 delegated	 to	tycoons
(oligarchs	 whose	 powers	 were	 limited	 to	 the
purely	 economic	 sphere	 —	 see	 the	 list	 of	 the
Russian	Union	of	Industralists	and	Entrepreneurs’
(RUIE)
[91]
	 management	 board	 members);	 the
oligarchs’	 political	 role	 was	 delegated	 to	the
presidential	 administration	 (Voloshin,	 Surkov,
Sechin,
[92]
	Medvedev);	and	the	role	of	oligarchs	in
the	 media	 was	 delegated	 to	‘clean’	 mediacrats
(Lesin,
[93]
	 followed	 by	 Kulistikov,
[94]
	 Ernst,
[95]
Dobrodeev).
[96]
	 The	 expert	 functions	 of	 the
oligarchs	were	assigned	to	the	expert	community
(Pavlovsky,	 Markov,
[97]
	 Nikonov,
[98]
	 and	 the
expert	councils	of	the	presidential	administration
and	 TV).	 The	 enforcement	 officers	 were	left	 to
their	 own	 devices.	 It	 was	 especially	 evident

during	the	period	when	the	Security	Council	was
headed	by	Sergei	Ivanov
[99]
	—	the	alleged	‘new
hey-day	 of	 the	 secret	 service’	 was	 simply	 the
removal	of	the	secret	service	from	the	oligarchs’
control.
In	 separating	 the	 oligarchs’	 functions	 Putin
created	five	separate	‘departments	of	the	political
will’:	 the	administration,	the	economic	tycoons,
the	mediacrats,	law	enforcement,	and	the	experts.
Theoretically	they	were	supposed	to	be	linked	to
the	President	while	bypassing	all	intermediaries,
who	 would	 otherwise	 try	 to	 further	 their	 own
interests.
Putin	as	the	Gatherer	of	Russian	Lands
[100]
and	Builder	of	Eurasia
With	 the	 advent	 of	 Putin,	 Moscow’s	 relations
with	 the	 Russian	 territories	 and	 the	 CIS	 also
changed	and	followed	the	route	of	‘enlightened
geopolitics’.	 Consistent	 and	 logical	 geopolitics

required	 that	 Putin	 strengthened	 the	 unity	 of
Russia,	revitalised	the	integration	processes	in	the
CIS	and	waged	bold	initiatives	to	create	strategic,
political	 and	 economic	 blocs	 with	 Europe	 and
Asia.	But	Putin	realised	only	part	of	the	elements
of	this	Eurasian	geopolitical	scenario,	which	was
exemplified	  by:	harsh	 opposition	 to	 the
disintegration	of	 Russia	 in	 Dagestan	 and
Chechnya,	reduction	 of	 the	 importance	 of	 the
Federation	 Council	 as	 a	 regional	 lobby,	 the
introduction	 of	 the	federal	 district	 system,	 the
creation	 of	 EurAsEC,	 and	 the	 signing	 of	 a
collective	security	agreement	with	the	CIS	states.
One	 can	 also	 include	 here	 closer	 diplomatic
relations	with	the	EU	and	the	renewal	of	relations
with	Asian	states,	especially	China,	North	Korea,
Japan,	Iran,	and	India.
All	 these	 steps	 were	 aimed	 at	 enhancing
Eurasian	 geopolitics,	 conducted	 with	 a	 certain
hesitation.	 Basically,	it	 is	 an	 active	 foreign

policy,	 aimed	 at	 enhancing	 Russia’s	 strategic
status	 in	 combination	 with	 domestic	 patriotism,
that	must	compensate	(in	terms	of	populism)	for
the	 unpopularity	 of	 liberal	 reforms	 in	 the
economy.	 From	 the	 outset	 Putin	 started
consistently,	 albeit	 cautiously,	 to	 move	 in	 that
direction.	
As	for	the	territorial	structure	of	Russia,	Putin
started	a	genuine	revolution.	Its	point	is	to	restrict
to	the	fullest	extent	the	geopolitical	independence
of	 the	 regions,	to	 deprive	 the	 territorial
subdivisions	 of	 any	 traces	 of	 sovereignty	 and
national	identity.	This	is	an	example	of	another
(domestically	 oriented)	 aspect	 of	 Putin’s
patriotism,	 his	 domestic	 geopolitical	 strategy.
Immediately	 after	 coming	 to	 power	 Putin
introduced	 federal	 districts	 for	 the	 purpose	 of
achieving	 direct	 strategic	 control	 over	 the
governors,	and	reformed	the	Federation	Council
in	 order	 to	 deprive	 the	 representatives	 of	 the

regions	of	their	full-scale	political	representation,
which	 had	 granted	 them	 broad	 political	 and
legislative	powers.
[101]
	 The	 establishment	 of	 the
State	 Council
[102]
	 along	 with	 the	 Federation
Council	transformed	the	status	of	the	heads	of	the
territorial	 subdivisions	from	 the	 political	 to	 the
consultative.	
The	First	Setback:	The	Atlanticist
Challenge	—	a	Loyalty	Test
The	setback	occurred	in	the	wake	of	9/11.	The	US
offered	Russia,	almost	as	an	ultimatum,	a	loyalty
test,	and	Putin	did	not	resolve	to	answer	it	in	a
strictly	Eurasian	fashion.	His	Eurasian	tendencies
weakened,	 which	 led	 to	 the	 establishment	 of
Western	military	bases	in	the	CIS	and	Georgia,	a
deterioration	 in	 relations	 with	 Lukashenko,
[103]
and	  so	  forth.	  Putin’s	  advisor	  Sergei
Yastrzhembsky
[104]
	  then	  directly	  opposed
Eurasianism.	 All	 of	 the	 above	 significantly

weakened	the	integrity	and	credibility	of	Putin’s
initial	formula	and	reduced	the	patriotic	potential
of	his	political	status.
Soon	after	9/11	a	Civil	Forum	was	organised
which	 discussed	 Gleb	 Pavlovsky’s	 proposal	 to
move	 from	 the	 ‘Putin	 majority’	 to	 a	 ‘Right
majority’,	 which	 was,	 in	 effect,	a	 return	 to
Yeltsin’s	politological	model.	It	did	not	lead	to	a
catastrophe,	but	the	balance	shifted	significantly.
The	 Putin	 formula	 implied	 unconditional
Eurasianism	  and	enlightened	 nationalism	 in
foreign	 and	 domestic	 policy	 as	 a	 compensation
for	 economic	 liberalism.	When	 things	 shifted
towards	 Occidentalism,	 the	 integrity	 of	 the
formula	 was	 affected,	 which	 led	 to	 fluctuating
moods	among	the	masses	and	reduced	ratings	for
Putin.
As	a	result,	the	balance	shifted	away	from	the
stable	 centre.	 The	 Putin	 formula	 (liberalism	 +
patriotism)	 was	 significantly	 weakened	 by	 the

impairment	of	the	national	component.	This	was
manifested	 by	the	 reduction	 of	 the	 Eurasian
potential	 in	 foreign	 policy	 (a	 shift	 towards	 the
West,	yielding	to	the	pressure	of	the	US,	and	the
slowing	 down	 of	 the	 integration	 process	 in	 the
CIS);	in	the	relative	connivance	to	the	new	wave
of	rebellions	among	some	national	leaders;	and	in
the	absence	of	an	explicit	and	consistent	patriotic
ideology	 in	 the	 media,	 education	 and	 culture.
That	 said,	 consistency	 was	 maintained	 in	 the
liberal	realm:	the	economy	was	managed	by	the
ultra-liberal	German	Gräf	and	Andrei	Illarionov,
the	 Land	 Code
[105]
	 was	 adopted,	 and	 the	 RAO
UES
[106]
	has	been	forced	to	restructure	under	the
formula	of	Chubais,	among	other	examples.
All	 of	 the	 above	 manifests	 itself	 on	 several
levels.	As	a	result,	at	that	point	one	could	have
expressly	stated	the	following:	the	beginning	of
the	fluctuations	in	popularity	characterised	by	a
reduction	in	President	Putin’s	rating,	the	slowing

down	 of	 centralisation,	poor	 efficiency,	 the
centrality	and	discipline	of	the	 ‘departments	 of
the	 political	 will’;	poor	 performance	 of	 the
presidential	 envoys	 and,	 as	 a	 consequence,	 the
beginning	 of	 a	 new	 stage	 of	 regional	 intrigue
among	 the	 heads	 of	 the	 territorial	 subdivisions
who	sensed	the	weakness	of	the	centre;	in	other
words,	the	dead	end	of	the	political	evolution	of
United	Russia,	which	had	to	follow	the	President
and	veered	from	an	initially	clear	position	as	a
result	 of	 the	 weakening	 of	 the	 nationalist
component	 and	 the	 inconsistency	 of	 the	 pro-
Western	course.
Putin’s	Ideological	Risks
Weakening	the	nationalist	element	of	his	formula,
Putin	 returned	 to	 the	 political	 model	 of	 the
Yeltsin	 era:	 the	 idea	 of	 liberal-democratic	 pro-
Western	 authority	 opposed	 to	 the	 non-liberal,
anti-Western	patriotic	masses,	the	latter	of	which

will	always	be	hostile	towards	the	liberalisation
of	energy	tariffs,	the	reform	of	housing	and	the
public	 utilities	 system,	 and	 the	 raising	 of	 the
public	transport	tariffs,	none	of	which	could	any
longer	be	offset	by	any	ethical	patriotic	rhetoric.
One	should	add	to	this	a	change	in	the	Western
attitude	towards	Putin.	A	number	of	Atlanticist
politicians	  (Paul	  Wolfowitz,	  Zbigniew
Brzezinski,	 etc.)	 believed	 that	 the	 geopolitical
self-liquidation	 of	 Russia	 as	 a	 potentially
independent	 pole,	 capable	 of	 geopolitical
competition	with	the	unipolar	realm	of	the	US,
was	too	slow	with	Putin	in	power	and	therefore
thought	that	this	process	should	have	been	given	a
new	impetus.	This	impetus	was	and	continues	to
be	realised	in	the	form	of	a	plot	to	remove	Putin
(this	scenario	is	favoured	by	American	analysts	as
well	as	by	exiled	Russian	oligarchs).	This	same
scenario	was	partially	behind	the	tragic	events	in
Moscow	 relating	 to	 the	 taking	 of	 hostages	 in

Dubrovka,	 in	 Beslan,	 the	 Moscow	 metro
bombings,	 Domodedovo	 and	 even	 in	 the
unhealthy	 activities	 of	 Medvedev’s	 entourage.
Washington	 has	 enough	 instruments	 to	 actively
encourage	regime	change	in	Russia.	Add	to	this
the	fact	that	after	the	military	operations	in	Iraq
and	Libya,	oil	prices	plummeted,	which	had	an
immediate	 negative	 impact	 on	 the	 Russian
economy.	And	there	are	yet	other	ways	they	have
attempted	to	disrupt	Putin’s	power.
One	 of	 them	 is	changing	 the	 nature	 of	 the
Communist	opposition.	All	these	years	it	has	been
ineffectual	because	it	has	not	been	connected	with
the	real	actors	—	the	oligarchs	and	the	Western
secret	 services.	 Even	 with	 the	 support	 of	 the
majority	 of	 the	 population	 this	 opposition
remains	politically	harmless,	 simply	 due	 to	 the
total	inadequacy	of	its	leaders,	the	absence	of	a
genuine	political	will	and	of	economic	resources,
and	 the	 incompetent	 behaviour	 of	 the	 party

apparatus.	 Providing	 this	 opposition	 with	 a
political	 will,	 coupled	 with	 support	 from	 some
anti-Russian	 forces	 in	 the	 American	 political
establishment,	is	something	that	could	drastically
change	 the	 very	 status	 of	 this	 opposition.
Zyuganov	 as	 number	 one	 on	 the	 list	 (negative
image,	 an	 unstable	 temperament,	 a	 repulsive
appearance)	should	be	replaced	by	Glazyev
[107]
	(a
neutral	 image,	 resilient	 temperament,	 decent
appearance)	 —	 and	 it	 would	 be	 possible	 to
observe	a	shift	in	the	entire	electoral	mood.	That
such	a	small	factor	could	have	that	significant	an
influence	is	not	a	demonstration	of	any	particular
merits	of	Glazjev,	but	of	the	compliance	of	the
‘non-liberalism	+	nationalism’	formula	with	the
expectations	of	the	overwhelming	majority	of	the
Russian	people.	
If	transforming	United	Russia	into	something
more	adequate	requires	massive	efforts,	a	sharp
rise	 in	 CPRF’s	 status	 requires	 pointed	 attacks,

which	 could	 easily	 be	 devised,	 polished	 and
realised	 by	 hostile	 oligarchs,	 or	 such	 as	 were
actually	attempted	by	Khodorkovsky	(especially
with	the	consent	of	the	US	secret	service).	Or	by
Vladimir	Putin	himself,	if	he	wanted	to	put	his
own	men	in	charge	of	the	party.
Therefore,	although	the	Putin	formula	during
his	first	two	presidential	terms	demonstrated	its
credibility,	  it	  has	  little	stability	 margin.
Liberalism	as	a	component	of	the	formula	gives
rise	to	a	lot	of	objections.	With	every	year	the
real	essence	of	liberalism	in	Russia	is	becoming
ever	more	evident.	Much	more	suitable	for	the
mood	of	the	electorate	are	the	formulas	located
within	 national	 non-liberalism	 (nationalism	 in
this	case	is	a	common	denominator).	The	Putin
formula	was	proclaimed,	played	and	fixed	at	the
outset	 of	 his	 presidency,	 and	 due	 to	 strict
compliance	with	this	formula	Putin	was	entirely
successful.	Today	 this	 formula	 is	 no	 longer

sufficient.	In	fact,	it	never	has	been.	It	had	to	be
lived	 with,	 but	 it	 was	 seen	 as	 an	 unpleasant
compromise.	 In	 a	 country	 with	 70	 years	 of
socialism	behind	it,	with	the	means	of	production
placed	in	public	ownership,	with	free	education
and	 the	 guaranteed	 right	 to	 labour,	 liberalism
does	 not	 yet	 have	 a	 chance	 to	 be	 a	 successful
political	slogan.
A	Digression	on	Liberalism
Liberalism	does	not	have	roots	in	Russian	history
or	 culture.	 Although	 at	 first	 glance	 the	 word
‘liberalism’	might	conjure	up	the	idea	of	liberty,
libertas	in	Latin	(which	is	soothing	to	the	Russian
ear	because	the	Russian	spirit	loves	liberty,	and
maybe	 that	 is	 why	 our	 land	 is	 so	 boundless),
‘freedom/liberty’	in	liberalism	is	understood	in	a
way	 totally	 alien	 to	 Russians:	 it	 is	 a	 negative
freedom.	To	understand	its	roots,	we	must	refer	to
the	 renowned	 theorist	 of	 liberalism,	 the	 British

philosopher	John	Stuart	Mill.	Mill	distinguishes
between	two	types	of	freedom,	expressed	by	two
different	 English	 words:	 liberty	 and	 freedom.
These	are	completely	different	notions.	‘Liberty’
is	 a	 notion	 that	 gave	 birth	 to	 ‘liberalism’.
According	to	Mill,	liberty	is	a	negative	freedom
—	a	‘liberty	from’	something.
Mill	 further	 specifies:	 the	 mission	 of	 the
liberal	is	freedom	from	sociopolitical,	religious,
social	and	mutual	obligations.	‘Liberty	from’	is
the	liberty	of	an	individual	from	society,	social
ties,	 interdependence	 and	 judgement	 by	 others.
Liberalism	stresses	that	the	measure	of	all	things
is	an	individual	businessman:	he	is	the	meaning
of	existence	and	the	centre	of	life.	Don’t	stand	in
his	way,	let	him	do	what	he	wants	—	buy	and	sell
—	 and	 we	 will	 live	 in	 the	 best	 of	 all	 possible
worlds.	A	businessman,	propelled	by	egotism	and
greed	 —	 which	 are	 considered	 to	 be	 virtues	 in
liberal	 philosophy	 —	 must	 be	 selected	 as	 the

universal	model.	All	legal,	administrative,	moral,
religious,	 and	 social	 restrictions	 must	 be
removed;	 his	 arbitrary	 whims,	 interests,
calculations	and	benefits	are	to	be	the	basis	of	the
new	value	system.
The	concept	of	liberalism	was	a	novelty	in	the
nineteenth	 century:	 there	 would	 be	 no	 more
religious	 and	 moral	 standards,	 no	 class
restrictions,	 and	 no	 governmental	 or	 social
controls	over	economic	activity.	Eventually,	there
would	be	no	state	or	society	at	all,	just	a	chaotic
jumble	of	businessmen	with	no	homeland,	faith,
ethics,	or	culture,	uncontrolled	and	unrestricted	in
every	 respect.	 Everyone	 would	 strive	 to	 satisfy
their	own	fancies,	and	only	one	irrational	force,
‘the	invisible	hand	of	the	market’,	would	direct
this	process	towards	the	desired	goal:	the	fat	cats
will	 get	 fatter,	 the	 rich	 will	 get	 richer,	 the
fortunate	 will	 prosper	 and	 the	 prosperous	 will
rejoice.	 This	 is	 the	 ‘liberty	 from’,	 and	 the

negation	here	is	quite	pointed:	the	things	that	we
should	break	free	from	are	real	and	palpable.	Yes,
it	is	true	that	man	is	restricted	by	a	lot	of	things	in
society	and	the	process	of	liberating	oneself	from
these	 obstacles,	 such	 as	 ethical	 standards	 and
social	responsibilities,	is	quite	transparent:	fewer
taxes,	 fewer	 taboos,	 less	 responsibility.	 But	 a
question	 arises:	 what	 is	 this	 liberty	 for?	 ‘What
from’	is	clear,	but	what	for?			
Here	 Mill	 comes	 up	 with	 a	 new	 word:
‘freedom’,	which	he	interprets	as	‘freedom	for’
and	 which	 he	 considers	 empty	 of	 substance.	 It
scares	Mill	and	the	liberals	because	it	refers	to
the	 deeply	 metaphysical,	 to	 the	 essence	 of	 the
human	spirit,	to	depths	that	are	difficult	to	cope
with.	The	‘freedom	for’	requires	a	higher	purpose
and	 a	 more	 fundamental	 understanding	 of
mankind.	It	poses	difficult	questions:	what	is	the
positive	meaning	of	life?	Why	does	man	work,
live,	breathe,	love	and	create?	‘Freedom	for’	tugs

at	 the	 heartstrings;	 it	 is	 a	 new,	 life-giving
darkness	to	which	the	philosophical	search	brings
us...	it	is	a	risk,	a	challenge,	a	distant	call	from
our	last,	deeply	hidden	depths...
John	Stuart	Mill	pales	before	this	question;	he
is	oppressed	by	the	sheer,	horrifying	amount	of
positive	 freedom	 being	 revealed	 and	 does	 not
know	how	to	handle	it.	He	avoids	the	answer.
And	 this	 is	 where	 the	 brilliant,	 merciless
Friedrich	Wilhelm	Nietzsche	comes	in:
You	call	yourself	free?	Your	dominating	thought	I	want	to
hear,	and	not	that	you	escaped	from	a	yoke.
Are	you	the	kind	of	person	who	had	a	right	to	escape	from
a	yoke?	There	are	some	who	threw	away	their	last	value	when
they	threw	away	their	servitude.
Free	from	what?	What	does	Zarathustra	care!	But	brightly
your	eyes	should	signal	to	me:	free	for	what?	[...]
Thus	spoke	Zarathustra.
[108]
‘Liberty	 from’	 is	 an	 aspiration	 of	 the	 eternal
slave;	a	free	spirit	must	choose	‘freedom	for’.	He
must	begin	and	end	with	it.

Liberalism	is	a	political	platform	that	is	alien
to	the	Russian	man.	We	are	a	proud	Slavic	people,
powerful	and	brave.	‘Why	then	have	you	been	on
your	 knees	 for	 centuries?’	 a	 sarcastic	 Anglo-
Saxon	 will	 ask,	 waving	 a	 piece	 of	 paper	 with
market	quotations	in	his	hand.	It	is	because	we
cannot	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 secret,	 difficult,	 crystal-
clear	and	lie-hating	‘for’.	We	love	true	freedom
too	much	to	trade	it	in	for	the	vulgar,	slave-like,
ugly	 liberal	 ‘from’.	 We’d	 rather	 stay	 on	 our
knees,	summoning	courage...	And	finally	speak
our	 great	 Russian	 word,	 the	 world’s	 last	 word:
‘Revolution’.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 word	 of	 ultimate
freedom,	positive	and	sun-soaked.	
Freedom	for...
Liberalism	as	an	Ideology	of	Globalisation
The	principal	ideologies	of	the	twentieth	century
were	 liberalism	 (Left-wing	 and	 Right-wing),
Communism	 (including	 both	 Marxism	 and

socialism/social	  democracy)	  and	  fascism
(including	National	Socialism	and	other	varieties
of	 the	 ‘Third	 Way’	 —	 Franco’s	 National
Syndicalism,	 Perón’s	 justicialism,	 Salazar’s
regime,	etc.).	They	fought	to	the	death,	shaping
the	entire	dramatic	and	blood-soaked	history	of
the	twentieth	century.
The	first	political	theory	is	liberalism.	It	was
the	first	to	appear	(as	far	back	as	the	eighteenth
century)	 and	 proved	 to	 be	 the	 most	 stable	 and
successful,	ultimately	winning	over	its	opponents
in	the	battle	of	history.	This	victory	was	proof,
inter	alia,	of	the	validity	of	liberalism’s	claims	to
be	 the	 successor	 of	 the	 entire	 legacy	 of	 the
Enlightenment.	 Although	 it	 had	 been	 disputed
earlier	(in	a	dramatic,	energetic	and	sometimes
convincing	manner)	by	another	political	theory,
Communism,	it	has	become	evident	that	it	was
liberalism	that	was	perfectly	suited	to	the	modern
era.	 Having	 won	 the	 battle	 against	 all	 other

ideologies,	liberalism	as	an	ideology	is	being	‘de-
ideologised’	 during	 the	 postmodern	 era.	 It	 has
ceased	 to	 be	 an	 ideology,	 and	 has	 been
transformed	 from	 a	 subject	 into	 an	 object	 and
becomes		natural	state	of	affairs,	an	‘objective’
state	of	things.	In	the	postmodern	era,	liberalism
‘virtualises’	reality,	merges	with	it,	and	ceases	to
be	 a	 political	 theory,	 becoming	 the	 only	 post-
political	 practice.	 ‘The	 end	 of	 history’
[109]
approaches,	politics	is	replaced	by	economics	(a
global	market),	and	states	and	nations	are	fused
together	 in	 the	 melting	 pot	 of	 globalisation.
Liberalism	is	becoming	a	global	programme	for
humanity,	 although	 it	 was	 born	 out	 of	 the
historical	 experience	 of	 specific	 parts	 of
humanity	 living	 in	 specific,	 geographically
restricted	 areas.	 Liberalism	 is	 not	 merely	 a
technical	principle	oriented	in	a	free	market,	with
competition,	 freedom	 of	 enterprise,	 private
initiative,	 and	 so	 forth.	 Liberalism	 is	 an	 anti-

national	ideology	that	is	destructive	for	Russia:
an	ideology	that	proclaims	money	and	material
welfare	to	be	the	measure	of	all	things,	destroying
the	moral	and	spiritual	fabric	of	human	society.
Liberalism	forms	a	specific	mentality,	a	system
of	humanitarian	values,	an	image	of	humans	and
humanity	 grounded	 in	 the	 premise	 that	 the
economy,	  the	  market,	  production	  and
consumption	 must	 morph	 from	 a	 subsidiary
sphere	 of	 our	 life	 into	 an	 end	 in	 and	 of	 itself,
serving	 as	 the	 single	 measure	 of	 all	 social
processes.	 Private	 property	 is	 proclaimed	 to	 be
the	ultimate	truth,	disrupting	the	social	basis	of
human	community,	separating	natural	collectives
—	peoples,	ethnic	groups,	communities,	religious
groups	 —	 and	 exacerbating	 alienation	 between
people,	nature	and	the	spiritual	world.
The	individual	is	the	cornerstone	of	liberalism
as	an	ideology	—	namely,	an	individual	stripped
of	 any	 collective	 identity	 (be	 it	 class,	 national,

communal	 or	 religious).	 Liberalism	 calls	 to
overcome	national	statehood	and	refuses	religious
identity,	treating	religion	as	a	private	matter,	and
opposes	any	attempts	at	giving	religion	a	social	or
public,	let	alone	political,	dimension.
Liberalism	is	completely	out	of	sync	with	our
national	tradition.	Nevertheless,	liberal	ideology
de	facto	determines	many	aspects	of	social	and
political	life	in	Russia.									
Liberalism	is	a	product	of	the	New	Times,	of
modernity.	It	originated,	as	I	already	noted,	out	of
the	 ‘liberty	 from’	 principle,	 which	 seeks	 to
liberate	 the	 individual	 from	 all	 forms	 of
collective	 identity:	 state,	 class,	 morality,	 race,
religion,	 authority,	 and	 so	 on.	 Then	 there	 is
‘freedom	for’	—	freedom	to	do	something.	But	in
liberal	 terms	 this	 is	 non-freedom.	 The	 liberals
say:	‘We	only	fight	for	‘freedom	from’	(liberty),
not	for	‘freedom	for.’	
Today,	another	form	of	collective	identity	is	in

conflict	 with	 the	 liberal	 dogma	 —	 gender.	 In
terms	of	liberalism,	people	are	divided	into	men
and	women	not	because	this	dichotomy	expresses
their	 individual	 specificity,	 but	 because	 they
share	 with	 other	 men	 and	 women	 a	 certain
collective	 identity.	 This	 is	 why	 a	 fight	 for	 the
rights	 of	 sexual	 minorities	 —	 perverts,
transgender	 products	 of	 transgenic	 operations,
homosexuals	 and	 freaks	 of	 all	 sorts	 —	 is	 the
crucial	ideological	platform	of	liberalism.	Many
may	think	that	this	is	just	an	arbitrary	element	of
liberal	freedom.	This	is	absolutely	not	the	case	—
this	 fight	 is	 at	 the	 very	 core	 of	 liberal	 policy.
Making	sexual	minorities,	transgender	marriages
and	 other	 perversions	the	 social	 norm	 is	 the
principal	aspect,	the	pivotal	point	and	the	staple
of	liberal	ideology.	There	is	no	type	of	liberalism
today	 that	 does	 not	 defend	 the	 rights	 of	 gays,
lesbians,	transsexuals,	and	so	on.	This	is	a	very
important	  point.	  Therefore,	  consistently

destroying	 all	 forms	 of	 collective	 identity,
liberals	 arrive	 at	 the	 necessity	 to	 free	 the
individual	from	all	such	forms,	including	one’s
own	gender	and	language,	which	is	a	collective
phenomenon	 (hence	 the	 idea	 of	 an	 individual
language).	Gradually,	liberalism,	having	lost	its
opponents	 and	 reaching	 its	 logical	 conclusion,
resolves	 to	 free	 an	 individual	 from	 all	 other
individuals,	because	a	human	being	also	belongs
to	the	collective	identity.	From	there	we	can	jump
directly	to	transhumanism	—	a	notion	that	it	is
necessary	 to	 create	 hybrids	 of	 man	 and	 other
species	with	the	help	of	genetic	engineering.	An
example	 of	 an	 attempt	 to	 break	 with	 human
identity	 is	 ‘A	 Cyborg	 Manifesto’	 by	 Donna	 J.
Haraway,
[110]
	and	the	ideas	of	the	transhumanist
programme.
Thus,	 liberty	 from	 gender	 is	 followed	 by
liberty	from	the	human.
Contemporary	liberal	or	post-liberal	ideology

amends	 the	 democratic	 model.	 If	 classical
democracy	 defends	 a	 decision	 of	 the	 majority
against	the	minority,	liberal	democracy	is	seen	as
the	protection	of	the	minority	from	the	majority.
This	reveals	aspects	of	liberal	ideology	that	we
had	not	known	before,	because	previously	liberals
had	 waged	 battles	 for	 freedom	 from	 fascism,
nationalism	 and	 Communism.	 It	 was	 assumed
that	 fascism	 was	 restrictive,	 nationalism	 was
restrictive	 too,	 and	 that	 liberals	 were	 the
liberators.	That	was	enough	for	liberalism	to	win.
Today,	liberals	do	not	have	any	opponents.	They
are	 left	 alone	 at	 the	 top	 and	 are	 free	 to	 say
whatever	 they	 want.	 And	 when	 they	 do,	 they
reveal	 the	 demonic,	 nihilistic	 essence	 of
liberalism.
A	declaration	of	individual	freedom	in	effect
means	total	dependence	of	the	common	man	on
the	 oligarchy.	 Individual	 freedom	 abolishes	 all
forms	of	collective	identity.	One	is	not	allowed	to

be	a	supporter	of	a	national	state	or	a	religious
institution,	because	this	is	not	politically	correct.
As	a	result,	a	demand	for	freedom	in	economics,
in	ideology	and	in	society	in	general	leads	to	a
new	 form	 of	 totalitarianism:	 the	 ideology	 of
human	rights	as	the	rights	of	the	individual	is,	in
effect,	 directed	 against	 humans,	 against	 social
values,	 traditions,	 language	 and,	 most	 of	 all,
against	freedom	itself.
Today,	 in	 realising	 the	 ‘liberty	 from’,	 we
understand	ever	better	that	this	nihilistic	agenda
is	leading	us	to	an	abyss.
It	should	be	noted	that	the	words	‘liberalism’
and	‘capitalism’	are	rarely	used	in	contemporary
Russian	 politics	 because	 they	 are	 taboo.	 They
come	up	mostly	in	Left-wing	politology,	which
has	 been	 pushed	 to	 the	 margin	 of	 politological
discourse.	In	a	former	socialist	country,	where	a
capitalist	coup	was	implemented	on	short	notice,
state	 and	 public	 property	 ended	 up	 in	 private

hands	and	social	guarantees,	along	with	workers’
rights,	 were	 done	 away	 with;	 such	 notions	 are
provocative,	 controversial,	 scandalous	 and
incendiary.	 The	 new	 ruling	 elite	 is	 monitoring
carefully	to	ensure	that	the	use	of	such	terms	is
limited	or,	even	better,	used	in	contexts	totally
devoid	of	substance.	For	example,	Zhirinovsky’s
Liberal-Democratic	 Party	 is	 neither	 liberal	 nor
democratic.	 If	 Russians	 found	 out	 the	 true
meaning	 of	 ‘liberalism’,	 as	 it	 is	 professed	 by
theorists	like	Hayek
[111]
	or	Ayn	Rand,	they	would
lose	their	minds.	After	finding	out	that	liberalism
opposes	 the	 state,	 the	 nation,	 the	 church,	 the
Orthodox	 faith,	 collectivism,	 gender,	 and
ultimately	 democracy	 itself,	 the	 Russian
electorate	would	permanently	refute	the	balancing
formula	 of	 ‘patriotism	 plus	 liberalism’	 that
allowed	Putin	to	curb	and	accommodate	the	two
opposing	poles	of	the	Russian	community	during
the	first	eight	years	of	his	presidency.	For	this

reason,	 liberalism	 is	 proliferating	 throughout
Russian	political	life	gradually,	in	 small	 doses,
and	is	camouflaged.	Liberalism	is	a	product	of	the
West,	so	unacceptable	to	the	Russian	consumer
that	one	must	change	the	label	before	trying	to
sell	it	to	us.	It	must	always	be	served	slathered	in
some	sort	of	edible	sauce.	Liberalism	is	imported
into	 the	 country	 disguised	 as	 ‘perestroika’,
‘democracy’,	  ‘efficiency’,	  ‘modernisation’,
humanitarian	values’,	or	something	of	the	kind.	In
other	words,	liberalism	is	alien	to	Russia,	is	not
accepted	by	the	population,	threatens	the	Russian
national	identity,	and	calls	the	very	existence	of
Russian	 civilisation	 into	 question.	 The	 second
ingredient	of	the	Putin	formula,	liberalism,	is	a
challenge	 and	 a	 stumbling	 block	 for	 Russian
politics;	it	will	become	ever	more	problematic	in
the	coming	years.
On	Putin’s	Responsibility	before

Christ	and	on	Elite	Rotation	
Many	 perceive	 Russia	 as	 an	 Orthodox	 country,
headed	by	an	Orthodox	leader.	That	being	said,	a
lot	 of	 absurd	 and	 unfortunate	 events	 are
happening	in	Russia,	and	somebody	must	be	held
accountable	 for	 this.	 Some	 people	 are	 held
accountable	 by	 the	 legal	 system,	 others	 by
corporations,	 be	 it	 the	 RUIE	 corporate	 ethics
commission	or	an	ecclesiastical	court.	But	since
we	 stress	 more	 and	 more	 that	 Russia	 is	 an
Orthodox	country,	why	not	contemplate	who	will
be	held	accountable	before	Christ	—	the	people	or
the	President?	I	am	not	in	favour	of	splitting	up
Orthodox	 Christians	 into	 the	 strictly	 observant
and	the	unchurched,	and	I	think	that	everybody
who	associates	himself	with	the	Orthodox	faith	is
an	Orthodox	Christian.	I	am	personally	a	strictly
observant	Orthodox	Christian	and	wish	you	to	be
the	same.	At	the	same	time,	Russia	has	a	partially
autonomous	system	of	government,	which	has	its

own	ideology	and	its	own	logic	and	structure	that
are	 very	 different	 from	 the	 religious	 and
Orthodox	paradigm.	But	there	are	also	the	people.
‘The	people’	is	a	remarkable	phenomenon	that	is
both	separate	and	independent.	‘The	people’	is	a
phenomenon	 with	 an	 independent	 essence.	 It
seems	 to	 me	 that	 there	 is	 a	 complicated
relationship	 between	 these	 three	 forms	 —
Orthodoxy	(the	Church),	the	Russian	state	and	the
Russian	people	—	and	this	relationship	has	been
constantly	changing	throughout	the	entire	course
of	Russian	history.	In	Russia,	every	politician	or
every	 man	 professing	 any	 kind	 of	 political
philosophy	has	to	decide	how	to	combine	these
notions	—	the	Church,	the	state	and	the	people,
and	has	to	decide	which	one	to	prioritise.
My	 political	 philosophy	 is	 based	 on	 the
assumption	that	the	Russian	people	are	the	most
important	 historical,	 spiritual	 and	 political
category.	 The	 people	 above	 all.	 The	 Russian

people	are	an	absolute	for	me,	an	inherent	value,
and	 an	 end	 in	 itself.	 These	 people	 are	 deeply
suffused	with	the	light	of	the	Orthodox	culture
and	have	been	chosen	by	Divine	Providence	for	a
special	mission.	I	do	not	draw	a	clear	distinction
between	Orthodox	messianism	and	the	spirit	of
the	Russian	people;	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same
coin.	A	spiritual	and	careful	reading	of	Russian
history	 reveals	 that	 at	 a	 specific	 point	 in	 the
middle	of	the	fifteenth	century	—	the	collapse	of
Tsargrad	 (Constantinople)
[112]
	 the	 future	 of
Universal	 Orthodoxy	 became	 completely	 fused
with	the	future	of	the	Russian	people.
The	 state	 is	 something	 completely	 different.
Over	 the	 past	 few	 centuries,	 it	 inevitably	 took
lower	priority	than	both	the	national	spirit	and	the
Orthodox	Church.	During	the	Muscovy	era
[113]
	the
state	was	suffused	in	the	light	of	the	Church	from
above	 and	 in	 the	 national	 ethos	 from	 below,
creating	a	certain	harmony	and	never	standing	in

the	way	of	universal	salvation.	When	the	state	is
transparent,	 when	 it	 is	 an	 instrument	 of	 a	 pull
process	toward	spiritual	and	universal	salvation,
everything	 goes	 well:	 the	 state	 naturally
participates	 in	 the	 spiritual	 rhythm	 of	 holy
history.	But	over	the	past	few	centuries	this	has
not	 been	 the	 case.	 The	 state	 is	 an	 artificial
construction,	alienated	both	from	the	Church	and
the	 people.	 It	 presents	 itself	 as	 an	 entity	 that
possesses	its	own	ontology.	This	ontology,	it	must
be	noted,	is	quite	dry,	alienated	and	dark.	From	a
spiritual	point	of	view,	during	the	Romanov	era
after	the	Schism,
[114]
	 the	 Russian	 state	 played	 a
largely	 negative	 role.	Any	 appeals	 to	 populism
and	Orthodoxy	were	superficial,	imposturous	and
artificial.	The	spirit	of	the	masses	revealed	itself
during	 the	 October	 Revolution	 (as	 seen	 by
Klyuev
[115]
	 and	 Platonov),
[116]
	 but	 during	 the
Khrushchev	and	especially	the	Brezhnev	eras	the
state	 again	 ended	 up	 becoming	 alienated	 from

both	 the	 masses	 and	 religion.	 All	 of	 Russia’s
misfortunes	can	be	attributed	to	the	contemporary
state,	 which	 is	 an	 artificial	 carbon	 copy	 of	 the
secular	European	model.	In	its	correct	form,	the
state	 should	 be	 subordinate	 and	 transparent,
permeable,	‘anagogic’,	a	‘pull	process’,	elevating;
it	must	serve	the	people	and	the	Church	instead	of
forcing	them	serve	the	state.	This	is	why	I	tend	to
blame	the	state	for	all	the	negative	aspects	of	our
history.	 Government	 ‘fascism’	 and	 autonomous
statism	in	Russian	history	are	repulsive	to	me.	I
think	that	the	best	course	would	be	to	eradicate
the	state	and	replace	it	with	the	Holy	Empire,	a
basileus,
[117]
	 a	 comprehensive	 katechonic
[118]
	
Tsardom,	where	the	divine	rays	directly	fuse	with
the	great	God-bearing	people	and	make	all	other
mechanisms	 and	 historical	 realities	 serve	 the
higher	aim,	which	is	embodied	in	the	secret	inner
existence	of	the	God-bearing	people.	Therefore	I
am	 a	 strong	 opponent	 of	 the	 contemporary

autonomous	state	and	I	tend	to	blame	it	for	all
absurdities	and	confusion.	At	the	same	time,	I	am
an	equally	strong	supporter	of	the	Empire.
An	Empire	in	Place	of	a	National	State
I	want	to	stress	that,	since	the	beginning	of	the
fifteenth	century,	the	state	and	the	empire	were
seen	as	opposite	extremes	in	Europe.	Bodin,
[119]
Machiavelli	and	Hobbes	developed	their	theories
of	the	‘state’	in	opposition	to	the	ontology	of	the
empire;	the	concept	of	the	state	is	a	product	of	the
repudiation	of	the	concept	of	an	empire.	The	state
is	  an	  artificial	  pragmatic	  construction,
desacralised	and	devoid	of	telos,
[120]
	purpose	and
substance.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 the	 empire	 is
something	alive,	sacred,	and	replete	with	purpose
and	essence:	something	that	has	a	higher	destiny.
In	an	empire,	the	administrative	apparatus	is	not
separate	from	the	religious	mission,	or	from	the
people’s	 spirit.	 The	 empire	is	 a	 universal

embodiment	 of	 this	 mission,	 illuminating	 the
elastic	energy	of	people	and	culture.
There	 is	 a	 concept	 of	 ‘organic	 democracy’
which	 implies,	 in	 the	 words	 of	Arthur	 Moeller
van	 den	 Bruck,
[121]
	 ‘a	 people’s	 involvement	 in
their	own	destiny’.	‘Organic	democracy’	is	when
a	person	acting	in	a	certain	cultural	field	actually
becomes	the	subject	of	history.	In	this	regard,	I
think	that	both	the	people	and	the	President	share
responsibility	 before	 God	 for	 everything	 that
happens	 in	 the	 country.	 This	 is	 my	 deepest
political	credo.	He	who	creates	is	to	blame.	The
question	is:	the	people	or	the	President?	In	my
opinion,	 history	 is	 created	 by	 people.
Responsibility	 lies	 with	 the	 people.	 The	 people
set	the	limits	of	historical	development	via	their
own	ideas	about	what	is	possible	and	admissible.
The	 people	en	masse	establish	these	parameters
because	 they	 are	 the	 bearers	 of	 culture,
spirituality,	 religion,	 and	 ideology,	 not	 their

particular	representatives	—	not	even	the	topmost
officials.	 The	 people	 propose	 certain	 solutions,
but	life	tends	to	be	a	harsh	critic	when	it	comes	to
projects	created	by	people.	The	events	around	us
limit	our	possibilities	when	it	comes	to	changing
the	parameters	of	our	civilisation	and	distorting
the	 vector	 of	 development.	 This	 self-regulating
historical	development	is	a	kind	of	compromise
between	the	spiritual	aspirations	of	the	people	and
the	realities	they	have	to	face.	Such	pressure	from
our	surroundings	often	forces	changes	in	vector
—	 points	 in	 history	 where	 quite	 palpable,
personified	characters,	instead	of	‘the	people’	as	a
collective,	 come	 into	 play.	 This	 is	 an
understanding	of	statehood	and	the	people’s	role
in	 terms	 of	 ‘organic	 democracy’.	 It	 would	 be
perfect	if	the	people	were	involved	in	their	own
destiny	and	were	the	subject	of	history.	This	is
what	we	are	fighting	for.	This	is	the	right	way.	It
must	be	a	moral	imperative	for	all	political	forces

in	Russia	and	for	the	people	themselves.	But	this
is	not	the	status	quo	—	it	is	an	aim	and	a	wish.
The	people	delegate	responsibility	to	the	ruler
or	the	ruling	group,	the	power	elite.	Ideally,	this
is	a	harmonised	and	natural	process:	the	people
externalise	in	power	the	most	intense	exertion	of
their	will,	the	best	part	of	their	soul.	In	this	case,
the	 system	 can	 be	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 ‘people’s
rule’,	 whether	 it	 is	 a	 democratic	 community,
autocracy	 or	 even	 ‘the	 people’s	 dictatorship’.
Historically,	 however,	 the	 ruler	 and	 the	 ruling
elite	 are	 not	 of	 the	 people.	 There	 is	 a	 rather
interesting	 politological	 model	 describing	 and
explaining	 this	 fact.	 This	 model	 says	 that	 the
political	 elite	 are	 radically	 different	 from	 their
people:	an	‘anti-people’,	not	only	in	a	social	and
functional	sense,	but	also	racially.	The	Polish	-
Jewish	  writer	  Ludwig	  Gumplowicz,
[122]
undeservingly	 forgotten	 and	 not	 widely	 known
today,	 proves	 in	 his	 books	 (especially	 in	The

Struggle	of	the	Races)
[123]
	that	the	elites	of	almost
all	historically	important	states	—	Russia,	France,
Austria,	Germany,	India,	Egypt,	Greece	—	were
initially	   newcomers,	   conquerors	   or
representatives	 of	 ethnic,	 religious	 or	 cultural
minorities.	All	political	elites	are	a	result	of	the
introduction	of	an	alien	ethnos,
[124]
	which	back	in
the	day	subdued	the	local	population	and	created
a	distinct	ruling	strata,	or	a	‘political	class’	(R.
Michels).
[125]
	 Subsequently,	 this	 group	 anchored
its	victory	in	the	governmental	system,	creating	a
system	 of	 privileges	 for	 its	 protégés	 and
establishing	its	own	acquisitive	welfare	in	spite	of
the	people.	Under	such	circumstances,	power	is
not	an	expression	of	the	spirit	of	the	people	or	of
religious	ideas;	it	is	a	xenomorphic	and	alienated
organisation.
If	 we	 look	 at	 today’s	 Russia	 or	 at	 Russia
during	the	Romanov	dynasty,	we	can	easily	spot
all	the	characteristics	of	a	xenomorphic	political

elite,	alienated	from	a	people	which	they	despise,
hate	and	fail	to	understand.	The	pro-Western	elite
of	 the	 eighteenth	 century	 regarded	 the	 Russian
people	 as	 ‘savages’	 and	 ‘Papuans’,	 just	 as	 the
Americans	looked	at	Indians.	Take	Biron,
[126]
	for
instance.	 My	 ancestor,	 Savva	 Dugin,	 a
Dashkov
[127]
	  follower,	  was	  beheaded	  for
demanding	 that	 the	 Patriarchate
[128]
	 be	 restored.
His	 so-called	 ‘Dugin	 papers’,	 which	 survived
until	 the	 twentieth	 century,	 condemned	 secular
power	 and	 the	 autonomous	 state,	 and	 were
circulated	mostly	among	the	Old	Believers.
The	Patriarchate	is	the	most	important	element
of	 the	 Orthodox	 tradition.	 It	 is	 inextricably
connected	 with	 awareness	 of	 Russians	 as	 the
chosen	people.	Savva	Dugin	demanded	to	restore
the	Patriarchate	and	dissolve	the	Synod	in	spite	of
the	secularity	and	Westernism	of	the	effectively
Russophobic	elite:	a	position	that	eventually	cost
him	 his	 life.	 During	 the	 cruel	 times	 of	 the

eighteenth	century,	Russian	men	with	beards,	or
who	wore	traditional	Russian	shirts,	straw	shoes
and	 girdles,	 were	 not	 allowed	 into	 the	 capital.
Before	 entering	 Saint	 Petersburg,	 they	 were
required	first	to	put	on	shakos,
[129]
	pantaloons	or
tights	and	to	shave	their	faces.	This	pro-Western
group,	 absolutely	 alien	 to	 Russia,	 ruled	 the
country	for	a	century.	In	pre-Schism	Russia,	the
absence	of	a	beard	was	a	sure	sign	of	a	‘loss	of
masculinity’.	 Aspects	 of	 a	 national	 identity
weren’t	 reestablished	 until	 the	 end	 of	 the
eighteenth	 century,	 and	 the	 nineteenth	 century
became	a	century	of	getting	back	to	the	national
ethos.	Likewise,	the	nobility	gradually	started	to
go	back	to	its	roots,	and	to	recall	the	good	ole’
days.
‘Organic	democracy’	is	only	wishful	thinking.
As	 it	 stands,	 the	 Russian	 state	 is	 something
entirely	 different:	 something	 alienated,	 formal,
mechanical,	aimless	and	pointless,	a	new	edition

o f	Leviathan.
[130]
	 To	 make	 things	 the	 way	 they
should	 be,	 a	 genuine	 revolution	 is	 necessary,	 a
revolution	 in	 a	 national	 and	 spiritual	 sense.	 A
‘people’s	 Putin’,	 a	 ‘people’s	 government’,	 a
‘people’s	state’	and	a	‘people’s	rule’	must	appear.
So	far,	the	xenomorphic	elite	still	speak	in	the
name	of	the	state.	This	‘liberal’	elite	replaced	the
Bolshevik	 elite,	 which	 were	 also	 effectively
opposed	to	the	people.	The	latter,	in	its	turn,	had
replaced	 the	 Romanov	 elite.	 And	 the	 cycle	 of
alienation	is	sadly	continuing.	Our	history	has	an
example	of	an	objectively	ingenious	combination
of	 ‘the	 peoples’	 and	 ‘the	 autocratic’,	 ‘the
imperial’,	the	elite	and	the	national	—	Muscovy
between	 the	 liberation	 from	 the	 Mongol-Tatar
Yoke	and	the	Schism.	This	period,	as	I	see	it,	is
the	 optimal	 period:	 democratic,	 Orthodox	 and
national	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 The	 people’s	 elite
disappeared	after	the	Schism.
The	Purpose	of	Orthodoxy	and	Political

The	Purpose	of	Orthodoxy	and	Political
Symphonia
It	is	important	to	understand	that	Orthodoxy	is
not	just	a	religion.	It	is	also	a	political	doctrine
and	a	political	theology.	We	often	disregard	this
fact.	A	 genuine	 Orthodoxy	 is	 tightly	 connected
with	 political	symphonia.
[131]
	It	can	be	said	that
Orthodoxy	as	a	political	philosophy	had	existed	in
Russia	before	the	Schism,	up	to	the	second	half	of
the	 seventeenth	 century.	 After	 the	 Schism,
Russia’s	 religious	 and	 political	 ideologies
separated,	 leaving	 the	 balance	 between	 the
national	and	the	elite	in	the	general	structure	of
the	state	and	society	in	a	condition	of	flux.
In	the	seventeenth	century,	for	a	certain	period
of	time,	the	Church	was	no	longer	free	from	the
state.	 Why?	 Because	the	 state	 was	 no	 longer
Orthodox,	it	was	no	longer	an	empire.	Note	that
the	term	‘Russian	Empire’	was	introduced	as	a
substitute	for	‘Rus’	precisely	when	Russia	ceased

to	be	an	empire	in	the	sacral,	katechontic	sense.
The	 state	 was	 ‘Orthodox’	 only	 nominally.	 In
terms	 of	 political	 philosophy,	 it	 ceased	 to	 be
Orthodox	 after	 the	 Schism.	 We	 know	 that
Nikon
[132]
	first	took	the	title	of	‘Orthodox	pope’,
but	then	Aleksey	Mikhailovich
[133]
		responded	by
diminishing	the	Patriarch’s	functions.	Then	came
the	 council	 of	 1666-67,	 when	 Holy	 Russia	 was
abused	 by	 impostors	 of	 all	 sorts:	 Paisius
Ligarides,
[134]
	 the	 Gaidars	 and	 Chubaises	 of	 the
seventeenth	 century.	 Then	 ‘The	 Horn	 of
Antichrist’,	 Peter	 the	 Great,	 abolished	 the
Patriarchate	 as	 well	 as	 monasticism,	 leaving
genuine	 Orthodoxy	 and	the	 genuine	 Church	 to
become	the	opposition:	the	‘Old	Believers.’	The
Church,	 in	 its	 philosophical,	 religious	 and
political	aspects,	started	to	oppose	the	Romanovs
and	 continued	 to	 adhere	 to	 its	 roots:	 to	 the
Moscow	 model	 under	 the	 global	 Old	 Belief
movement.	In	the	nineteenth	century,	one	out	of

every	three	Russians	was	an	Old	Believer.	Given
that	the	elite	did	not	practice	Old	Belief	at	all,
this	actually	meant	that	every	other	Russian	(of
the	 people)	 was	 an	 Old	 Believer	 (sometimes
referred	to	as	a	‘sectarian’,	‘a	spiritual	Christian’,
a	Khlyst,	a	Skoptsy	man	or	a	Molokan),
[135]
	but
not	a	conformist,	and	not	a	‘tool’.	Thus,	we	have
not	 known	 genuine	 Orthodoxy	 for	 over	 three
hundred	years.
Incredible	as	it	may	seem,	some	elements	of	a
free	church	emerged	for	a	short	period	in	1917.
Why	 had	 it	 not	 been	 possible	 to	 restore	 the
Patriarchate	before	then?	It	was	because	the	entire
system	 of	 Russian	 statehood	 was	 devised	 to
prevent	its	return.	The	whole	system	was	built	on
the	 premise	 of	 an	 anti-Orthodox,	 anti-Eastern
political	and	religious	philosophy.	Orthodoxy	was
seen	merely	as	a	moral	instrument	equivalent	to
Protestantism.	Everything	else	was	suppressed.	In
1917,	 Russia	 was	 freed	 from	 the	 Romanov

statehood	and	the	Patriarchate	was	soon	restored:
the	concept	of	‘single	faith’	was	reestablished	and
a	process	of	reassessment	and	reconsideration	of
the	 Old	 Belief	 began.	 It	 was	 a	 ‘quantum	 of
freedom’,	 and	 it	 would	 have	 ended	 on	 a	 very
positive	note	if	the	Bolsheviks	had	not	suppressed
it.
The	second	quantum	came	after	the	collapse	of
the	Soviet	system.	The	first	quantum	was	utilised
immediately	because	Church	traditions	were	still
alive.	 But	 after	 the	 fundamental	 abuse	 of	 our
Church	and	our	national	idea	during	the	period	of
totalitarian	Marxism,	we	are	still	not	able	to	use
the	 second	 quantum.	 Two	 hundred	 years	 of
atrocious	‘Romanovism’	and	almost	one	hundred
years	of	genocide	of	the	Russian	people	during
Communist	rule	have	left	us	in	critical	condition.
We	were	given	freedom,	but	the	time	to	use	it	has
only	come	now;	we	are	just	now	coming	to	our
senses.	When	we	start	to	truly	ponder	the	nature

of	our	‘freedom’,	we	will	also	be	thinking	about
our	 Russian	 political	 doctrine.	 This	 will
inevitably	 lead	 us	 to	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 empire,
symphonia,	 and	 the	 katechon.	 I	 think	 that	 the
previous	 Patriarch,	 the	 late	 Alexei	 II,
[136]
	 was
absolutely	 justified	 in	 vetoing	 the	 clergy’s
participation	in	the	election	process.	Had	he	not
done	so,	today’s	bewildered	priests,	a	little	drunk
with	 freedom,	 might	 have	 steered	 us	 blindly
toward	 any	 random	 idea:	 	 some	 toward
Communism	 and	 Zyuganov,	 others	 toward
liberalism,	and	the	rest	toward	fascism.	We,	as
people	of	the	Church,	must	understand	how	to	use
this	freedom	correctly.	I	think	that	the	model	of
the	Church’s	relation	to	politics	should	be	built
around	the	roots	of	our	tradition	and	embodied	in
some	sort	of	religious-political	project.	But	the
right	time	for	such	a	project	has	only	come	now,
and	requires	some	time	to	mature	fully.

Globalisation	as	an	Incentive	for
Archaisation
Globalisation	and	the	postmodern	era	associated
with	it	can	be	perceived	by	Russian	society,	by
the	core	of	the	Russian	people,	as	a	new	incentive
for	even	further	fundamental	archaisation.	If	we
reach	 the	 paradigmatic	 depths	 of	 our	 people’s
collective	 unconscious,	 they	 will	 be	 better
equipped	to	use	the	models	of	globalisation	and
the	postmodern	era	as	an	efficient	instrument	for
awakening,	 just	 as	 they	 were	 able	 to	 find	 an
efficient	 anti-Western	 instrument	 in	 Western
Bolshevism.	  This	  does	  not	  mean	  that
postmodernism	and	globalisation	are	good	at	their
core.	They	are	not	good;	they	are	the	worst	of	all
evils.	But	if	we	look	closely	at	the	structure	of
this	evil,	almost	absolute	and	immaculate,	we	will
be	able	to	formulate	the	most	radical	and	decisive
antithesis,	to	reach	the	very	depths	of	our	national
soul.	 The	 Russian	 people	 and	 our	 Orthodox

tradition	must	be	restored	by	an	act	of	will	to	its
initial	pure	form.
Have	the	Russian	people	disappeared	or	not?
This	is	an	almost	ontological	question.	If	we	look
a t	people	as	 a	 collective	 assembly	 of	 various
tendencies	 —	 historical,	 cultural,	 ethnic,
religious,	philosophical	and	conceptual	—	then,
of	course,	they	have	become	invisible.	‘There	is
no	 people’	 is	 as	 metaphysical	 a	 statement	 as
‘there	is	a	people’;	it	follows	the	same	formula.
We	cannot	make	a	reasonable	argument	here.	If
we	assume	that	‘there	is	no	people,’	then	there	is
only	society,	and	therefore	globalism	is	a	more
advanced	 and	 modernised	 form	 of	 the	 social
structure,	which	means	that	it	will	inevitably	win.
There	will	only	be	passive	resistance	to	it,	and
therefore	our	gradual	dissolution	into	globalism	is
inevitable.	 This	 is	 what	 globalists	 and	 liberals
themselves	think.	But	the	belief	that	there	is	no
people	is	an	evil	belief;	it	wishes	for	the	concept

of	‘a	people’	to	be	non-existent,	and	it	kills	the
concept	 by	 its	 very	 existence.	 This	 is	 wishful
thinking...
There	is	a	more	hopeful	belief	—	a	belief	that
there	is	a	people.	This	belief	gives	rise	to	a	new
historical	 subject	—	 the	demos,
[137]
	 which	 we
possibly	 just	 cannot	 see.	 The	 people	 is	 an
‘infinitely	big	atom’	which	we	do	not	see.	But	it
is	there,	and	it	occasionally	makes	itself	known.
If	we	stick	to	the	hypothesis	of	the	fixed	existence
of	an	ethnos,	the	hypothesis	of	the	permanence	of
the	Russian	people	with	its	own	stable	system	of
paradigms,	 which	 reacts	 to	 everything	 as	 a
uniform	 living	 being	—	 retracts,	 attacks,	 calms
down,	shouts	—	then	we	will	be	able	to	draft	a
project	of	the	permanent	people’s	participation	in
contemporary	history,	as	well	as	in	postmodern
and	global	history.	In	this	case,	the	contemporary
influences	that	Russians	have	definitely	already
absorbed	will	not	necessarily	stand	in	the	way	of

archaisation.	 We	 can	 try	 and	 assimilate
modernity,	globalisation	and	postmodernism	for
our	national	ethnical	purposes	and	build	a	system
of	 civilisation,	 government	 and	 religion	 that
would	meet	our	core	interests,	the	interests	of	our
people.	 This	 project	 can	 be	 dubbed	 a	 Eurasian
Empire,	a	new	multipolar	world,	and	a	qualitative
mutation	of	the	substance	of	postmodernism.	We
should	think,	search	for	and	make	attempts	in	this
direction...
The	xenomorphic	entity	whose	representatives
have	 interpreted	 globalisation	 not	 only	 as	 an
objective	phenomenon	and	challenge,	but	 as	 an
ethical	positive	they	were	prepared	to	serve	and
obey	and	which	they	were	going	to	make	the	basis
of	the	country	and	its	statehood,	and	which	had
been	largely	in	their	control	for	some	time,	has
lost	the	fight	for	power.	They	were	not	merely
‘reformers’,	they	were	‘globalist	reformers’,	they
shaped	 Russia	 into	 a	 country	 that	 fit	 into

globalism.	 Khodorkosvky	 directly	 stated	 this,
Voloshin	supported	it,	and	Pavlovsky	repeatedly
declared	it	as	an	ideology.	Chubais	stressed	it	in
economic	 and	 political	 terms.	 That	 said,	 the
‘progressives’	 of	 the	 globalist	 type	 have	 a
fundamental	 base	 not	 only	 overseas,	 which	 is
obvious,	but	in	Russian	society	as	well.	This	base
is	an	alienated	Russian	statehood,	which	has	been
dubbed	 ‘tools’	 by	 the	 Old	 Believers.	 These	 are
totally	 Russian,	 slightly	 alcoholic	 and	 slightly
anti-Semitic	civil	servants,	who	feed	the	decision-
making	xenomorphic	elite	with	their	own	blood.
The	basis	for	the	rise	of	Khodorkovsky,	Voloshin,
Chubais	and	their	successors	is	the	huge	vested
interests	 of	 the	 ‘tool’	 Russian	 officials	 of	 the
state,	who,	in	fact,	had	given	birth	to	the	oligarch
system	and	set	the	scene	for	the	globalist	system,
for	the	implementation	of	the	‘global’	corruption
of	the	state	and	of	the	social	fabric.	In	reality,	the
huge	 	 government	 apparatus	 of	 ‘tools’	 is	 the

principal	 source,	 creator	 and	 patron	 of	 the
socially	  functional	  existence	  of	  the
representatives	 from	 the	 liberal	 oligarchy,	 the
cosmopolitan	intelligentsia	and	the	‘Family’	clan
of	corruptors	and	lobbyists	of	the	Yeltsin	breed.
Therefore,	when	we	speak	of	the	‘rotation	of	the
elite’	 we	 must	 be	 clear:	 the	 front	 ranks	 have
merely	been	filled	by	scapegoats	and	clowns.	The
scriptwriters	and	giants	of	decay	and	degeneration
lurk	 in	 the	 shadows.	 If	 new	 henchmen	 of	 this
meaningless	 state	 corruption	 machine	 replace
them,	 we	 will	 be	 even	 worse	 off	 than	 we	 are
today.	It	will	be	a	faux	substitution,	not	a	genuine
rotation.	The	forces	of	alienation	and	degradation
will	 place	 new	 people	 who	 will,	 in	 turn,	 be
removed	and	replaced	by	others,	all	of	the	same
mentality.
We	 have	 the	 Russian	 people:	 they	 must	 be
legally	 and	 politically	 acknowledged	 as	the
supreme	authority	with	enduring	value,	and	their

God-bearing	status	must	be	confirmed.	Then	we
must	 not	 only	 use	 their	 will	 and	 existence	 to
oppose	 the	 withering	 and	 already	 partially
imprisoned	 xenomorphic	 elite,	 but	 also	 to
challenge	the	alienated	bureaucratic	government
machine	 that	 gave	 rise	 to	 this	 elite	 class	 by
engineering	it,	advancing	it,	and	backing	it	with
property	and	social	leverage.	This	is	not	an	easy
task.	Russians	are	living	in	an	imaginary	world,
and	it	is	highly	probable	that	we	will	again	be
deceived	and	betrayed	by	an	intermediate	caste	of
state	 ‘tools’.	 And	 we	 will	 fall	 for	 their	 tricks
again,	 unless	 we	 recruit	 fundamentally	new
people	to	serve	for	the	good	of	the	nation.	Let
them	be	Armenian,	Jewish,	Georgian,	or	Chechen,
but	 they	 should	 be	 bright	 personalities	 and
energetic	activists.	Creative	people	are	needed,	no
matter	their	origin,	to	be	sworn	supporters	of	the
immense,	 great,	 eternal,	 holy	 and	 universal
principle	represented	by	the	Russian	people.	Let

‘small	people’	who	are	able	to	work	efficiently
help	 to	 realise	 the	 aspirations	 of	 the	 ‘great
people’.
Putin	on	His	Own:	Without	the	Elites
Putin,	for	the	first	time	in	a	long	era	of	history,
has	created	the	possibility	of	and	the	foundation
for	 a	 genuine	 revival	 of	 the	 Russian	 people.
Currently,	 Vladimir	 Putin	 is	 alone;	 he	 is
surrounded	by	a	massive	bureaucratic	apparatus
which	 will	 undoubtedly	 nominate	 a	 new	 elite
force	who	will	only	worsen	the	current	state	of
affairs.	Under	the	right	circumstances,	it	is	easier
to	convert	people	like	Khodorkovsky	and	make
them	genuine	narodniks	—	true	advocates	of	the
state	—	than	to	expect	any	help	from	the	‘new
predators’	and	the	‘new	greedy’	officials,	even	if
they	are	ethnic	Russians.	This,	to	me,	is	the	only
way	to	initiate	a	genuine	rotation	of	the	elite:	to
make	the	‘small	people’	serve	the	Great	Eurasian

cause.	We	are	less	interested	in	individuals,	and
much	 more	 concerned	 with	 the	ideological
paradigm.	Khodorkovsky	had	the	good	sense	to
request	books	 on	 Russian	 history	 while	 serving
his	prison	sentence.	He	was	ripe	for	a	proposal	of
a	systemic	plan	to	join	Eurasianism.	He	could	not
be	bothered	with	trifles	or	monetary	threats,	to
which	 he	 responded	 honourably,	 plainly	 and
clearly	—	‘no’.	He	knew	how	to	converse	with
law	 enforcement	 officers,	 beggars	 and	 bandits.
But	if	one	were	to	approach	him	with	a	system,
complete	 with	 logistics	 and	 a	 model,	 he	 would
probably	be	the	first	to	support	another	version	of
globalisation	 —	 not	 in	 the	 American,	 unipolar
way,	 but	 in	 a	 Eurasian	 and	 multipolar	 one.
Khodorkovsky	 was	 wrong,	 but	 he	 made	 a
systemic	 error,	 not	 a	 chance	 error;	 replace	 the
plus	in	his	philosophy	with	a	minus	and	he,	along
with	 Yukos,
[138]
	 would	 be	 invaluable.	 With
specific	types	of	people,	inducing	such	a	shift	is

much	easier	than	it	might	seem.	I	would	suggest
that	 the	 ‘democrats’	 and	 ‘liberals’	 who	 are
starting	 to	 feel	 the	 beginnings	 of	 a	 political
backlash	not	take	it	to	heart,	but	focus	instead	on
studying	 the	 history	 of	 the	 Russian	 people	 and
trying	to	understand	the	logic	behind	it.
The	Anti-American	Consensus
The	American	invasion	of	Iraq	in	the	spring	of
2003	had	serious	repercussions	for	the	domestic
political	environment	in	Russia,	yielding	quite	a
few	 electoral	 surprises	 on	 the	 eve	 of	 the
upcoming	  parliamentary	  and	  presidential
elections.	Russian	society	is	ideologically	divided
along	 completely	 different	 lines	 than	 party
affiliations	might	suggest.	Our	party	system	was
created	hurriedly;	it	is	constantly	inundated	with
immature	players,	and	some	forces	who	genuinely
represented	 the	 people	 have	 been	 forcefully
excluded.	This	system	does	not	reflect	our	society

and	therefore	raises	eyebrows	and	evokes	disgust.
Russians	think,	feel	and	believe	in	a	way	that	is
entirely	different	from	the	people	who	have	been
offered	up	by	the	Russian	party	system	and	its
political	 strategists.	 Remove	 these	 parties	 and
there	won’t	be	any	fundamental	changes	—	new
parties	can	easily	be	created,	or	even	forgotten
altogether	as	a	useless	and	insignificant	concept.
But	 this	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 the	 people	 are
apolitical	 and	 indifferent,	 only	 that	 they	 have
opted	 to	 choose	 what	 to	 care	 about	 from	 a
completely	different	set	of	categories.
After	the	onset	of	American	aggression	in	Iraq,
the	overwhelming	majority	of	Russians	made	one
such	 choice:	anti-Americanism.	Saddam	was	not
an	especially	sympathetic	character,	but	George
W.	Bush	was	particularly	disliked.	This	was	not
just	an	idle	reaction	to	global	problems	confined
to	 a	 few	 sign-waving	 protests.	 It	 was,	 and
continues	 to	 be,	a	 living,	 vibrant	 social	 factor.

The	people	feel	what	is	going	on	with	their	hearts,
their	very	skin.	It	is	a	deeply	emotional	position.
Anti-Americanism	and	increased	attention	to	the
US	 as	 a	 threat	 to	 Russia	 is	 a	 recurrent	 social
motif.	In	order	to	change	it	radically,	an	event	of
a	similar	scale	needs	to	occur,	and	it	is	hard	to
imagine	what	event	this	could	possibly	be.
The	Russian	government,	represented	by	Putin,
took	an	anti-American	stance	on	Iraq.	Then	Putin
entered	into	a	coalition	with	two	European	states,
France	 and	 Germany,	 which	 also	 refused	 to
support	 the	 unlawful	 US	 invasion	 of	 Iraq.	 He
asserted	Russia’s	sovereignty	in	terms	of	foreign
policy,	and	maintained	his	strategic	interests	in
Iraq.	‘The	invasion	of	Iraq	is	a	mistake’,	Putin
said,
[139]
	 pitting	 himself	 against	 the	 Russian
community	 of	 experts,	 which,	 in	 late	 2002	 and
early	 2003,	 unanimously	 claimed	 that	 Russia
must	join	the	coalition	against	Iraq	(today	Putin’s
refusal	to	make	concessions	to	the	US	is	seen	by

the	 same	 experts	 as	 a	 logical	 foreign	 policy
strategy).
At	the	time,	Putin’s	difficult	decision	was	not
influenced	 by	 public	 sentiment	 alone.	 In	 fact,
Putin	has	repeatedly	proven	that	he	can	have	his
way	even	when	the	masses	disagree	with	him	(his
support	of	the	ultra-liberal	economic	bloc	of	the
Russian	 government	 is	 a	 good	 example).	 In
joining	 the	 ‘peaceful	 coalition’	 (France,
Germany,	China,	some	Islamic	states,	etc.),	Putin
was	  driven	  primarily	  by	  geopolitical
considerations.	The	people,	relying	primarily	on
their	emotions	and	intuition,	might	use	different
arguments	 and	 logical	 processes	 to	 explain	 his
actions,	 but	 anti-Americanism	 was	 the	 primary
focus	no	matter	which	way	you	look	at	it.	This	is
already	a	social	fact.
The	fact	that	the	Russian	government	began	to
resonate	 with	 the	 public’s	 anti-American
sentiments	added	 legitimacy	 to	 the	 authorities,

giving	 rise	 to	 a	 new	 consensus	 structure.	 This
consensus	 has	 clear	 ideological	 parameters:	 a
national	idea,	a	statehood,	rejection	of	American
as	the	ultimate	standard,	and	the	strengthening	of
Russia’s	sovereignty	and	status	as	a	world	power.
Many	sceptics	call	this	‘the	phantom	pain	of	the
lost	empire’,	a	nostalgia	of	sorts.	Be	 that	 as	 it
may,	this	sentiment	is,	at	the	same	time,	a	kind	of
remission:	 social	 myths	 have	 power	 and	 might
become	 truly	 mobilising	 factors.	 The	 Treaty	 of
Versailles,	 for	 instance,	 resulted	 in	 the	 Third
Reich	by	creating	large-scale	national	frustration
in	Germany.	Putin,	acting	quite	correctly	in	his
relations	with	the	US,	obtained	a	brand	new	social
resource	 for	 his	 domestic	 policy.	 He	 obtained
additional	 sanctions.	 And	 since	 the	 US	 acted
outside	 the	 boundaries	 set	 by	 the	 international
legal	 framework,	 repeating	 its	 transgressions
against	Iraq	in	Libya	and	 ultimately	 destroying
the	old	world	order	that	had	been	agreed	upon	in

Yalta,	Putin	received	a	special	historical	mandate
that	 allowed	 him	 to	 move	 confidently	 and
energetically	 through	 the	 complex	 international
playing	 field:	 he	 was	 backed	 by	the	 social
consensus	of	anti-Americanism.
What	is	anti-Americanism?	Naturally,	it	isn’t
directly	 related	 to	 the	 US	 and	 its	 political	 and
economic	 system.	 The	 resentment	 is	 directed,
first	of	all,	at	American	aggression	toward	other
countries	(grounded	in	the	expectation	that	Russia
‘may	be	next’),	and	not	at	the	US	itself.		This	is
defensive,	 conservative	 anti-Americanism,	 a
sentiment	grounded	in	survival	and	preservation.
In	 this	 sense,	 it	 is	 a	mass	 phenomenon.	 This
characteristic	 sets	 it	 apart	 from	 other	 forms	 of
anti-Americanism,	 which	 are	 common	 in	 either
Right-wing	  conservative	  Orthodox-patriotic
movements	or,	on	the	other	end,	in	Communist
circles	that	reject	the	US	in	principle.	But,	in	the
face	of	the	events	in	Iraq,	these	differences	were

washed	away	and	became	negligible:	ideological
and	 radical	 forms	 of	 anti-Americanism	 became
assimilated	 into	 the	 more	 passive	 anti-
Americanism	of	the	masses.	The	definite	focus	of
this	 general	 phenomenon	 is	 Putin.	 Putin	 has
effectively	 become	 the	 driving	 force	 behind
social	integration,	the	axis	of	sociopolitical	life,
and	 the	 direct	 spokesman	 for	 the	 hopes	 and
expectations	 of	 the	 majority,	 even	 to	 a	 greater
extent	than	necessary.
How	 can	 Vladimir	 Putin	 use	 the	 anti-
Americanism	of	the	masses	for	his	benefit?	One
should	 take	 into	 account	 that	 Putin’s	 positions
will	 contrast	 greatly	 with	 that	 of	 the	 political
elite,	 who	 traditionally	 rely	 on	 transnational
projects,	support	marginal	liberal	politicians,	and
in	 some	 way	 or	 the	 other	 have	 ties	 to	 the	 US.
Changes	in	the	balance	of	this	sphere	require	the
development	of	new	rules	regarding	cooperation
between	 the	 oligarchs	 and	 the	 authorities,	 with

allowance	 for	 geopolitical	 (military-industrial)
indexes	and	social	projects.	Putin	can	implement
a	covert	renationalisation	of	the	country’s	largest
companies,	not	in	terms	of	changing	their	legal	or
property	status,	but	in	terms	of	establishing	a	new
system	 based	 on	 the	 direct	 and	 transparent
consideration	 of	 national	 and	 social	 interests.
Putin	and	the	nation	happen	to	be	on	the	same
side	of	the	fence,	and	the	oligarchs’	chance	to	use
the	‘blind	masses’	in	their	own	interests	is	almost
non-existent.	Simultaneously,	the	functional	role
of	 the	 CPRF	 as	 a	 supporter	 of	 nationalisation
would	 also	 be	 called	 into	 question,	 and	 its
mission	 would	 be	 delegated	 directly	 to	 the
authorities.
Putin’s	Munich	Speech	—	a
Turning	Point	in	Russian	History
Vladimir	Putin’s	speech	in	Munich
[140]
	became	a

turning	point	in	contemporary	Russian	history.	It
would	be	a	mistake	to	think	that	the	Cold	War
ended	 in	 1991.	 Rather,	 one	 should	 say	 that	 the
Soviet	Union	unilaterally	withdrew	from	the	war.
In	doing	so,	it	did	not	sign	any	documents	and	did
not	 negotiate	 any	 terms.	 This	 withdrawal	 was
presented	to	the	Russian	people	as	the	end	of	the
war.	Imagine	the	following	situation:	two	powers
are	 fighting	 with	 each	 other.	 Suddenly	 one	 of
them	proclaims:	‘I	am	out	of	the	war,’	without
specifying	whether	it	considers	itself	the	winner
or	the	loser.	A	dubious	situation	arises:	one	of	the
sides	withdraws	from	the	conflict,	thinking	that
the	other	will	withdraw	as	well.	Except	the	other
side	 doesn’t.	 Notably,	 the	 former,	 who	 has
already	 dismissed	 its	 army	 (the	 Warsaw
treaty),
[141]
	tore	down	its	bases	(both	in	Eastern
Europe	and	in	the	USSR)	and	began	to	concern
itself	with	internal	affairs,	in	effect	finds	itself	in
the	position	of	the	loser.	‘The	winner’,	in	turn,

starts	to	treat	its	opponent	as	the	loser.	But	the
political	elite	of	the	losing	country	does	not	tell
its	 people	 that	 their	 country	 has	 lost,	 and
continues	to	act	like	nothing	happened.	It	makes
it	seem	like	the	Cold	War	is	over	and	it’s	a	tie.
This	situation	had	persisted	since	Gorbachev
and	 continued	 until	 Putin’s	 speech	 in	 Munich.
The	Americans	have	never	stopped	fighting	the
Cold	 War.	 They	 keep	 on	 advancing,	 expanding
the	NATO	bloc	and,	at	the	same	time,	claiming
everything	that	we	aren’t	keeping	an	eye	on:	first
in	Eastern	Europe	and	the	Baltic	states,	then	in
the	CIS	itself.	In	other	words,	the	US	always	has,
and	always	will	be	waging	a	Cold	War	against
Russia.	This	is	why	Putin,	by	and	large,	didn’t
really	 say	 anything	 new	 in	 his	 Munich	 speech.
Conversely,	 the	 Russian	 government	 during	 the
Gorbachev	and	Yeltsin	eras	acted	like	a	colonial
administration,	 pretending	 that	 the	 US	 was	 not
waging	a	Cold	War	against	us,	glossing	over	US

occupations,	 and	 not	 allowing	 the	 people	 to
mobilise	themselves	in	order	to	obtain	freedom
and	 sovereignty.	 These	 leaders	 destroyed	 the
people’s	 drive	 for	 resistance	 and	 victory	 by
dulling	their	sense	of	awareness.	During	Yeltsin’s
presidency,	 a	 completely	 opposite	 model	 was
promoted:	Russia	was	acting	in	line	with	NATO’s
policy	and	betraying	its	own	geopolitical	essence.
When	 Putin	 came	 to	 power,	 many	 of	 his
statements	and	actions	gave	rise	to	speculations
that	 he	 was	 more	 inclined	 to	 side	 with	 the
Eurasian	 model	 and	 the	 multipolar	 world	 than
with	Yeltsin’s	political	course...
From	the	‘Cool	War’	to	a	‘Hot	Phase’
During	his	first	presidency,	Putin,	under	the	guise
of	obedience	to	the	occupation	forces,	pursued	a
policy	of	internal	mobilisation.	In	other	words,	he
was	preparing	an	uprising.	He	was	merely	waiting
for	the	right	moment	when	he	would	be	able	to

openly	say	to	the	world	and	his	own	people	that
the	Cold	War	against	Russia	had	never	ended	in
the	first	place,	and	that,	in	kind,	our	country	was
still	 at	 war.	 He	 started	 off	 talking	 about	 the
concept	 of	 ‘sovereign	 democracy’,	 and	 finally
called	a	spade	a	spade	in	his	Munich	speech	in
2007.
The	concept	of	‘sovereign	democracy’
[142]
	became
common	 in	 2005-2006	 and	 was	 one	 of	 the
principal	ideologemes	during	the	presidential	and
Duma	elections	in	2007-2008.
At	 the	 time,	 I	 was	 contemplating	 the
deconstruction	of	democracy	and	thought	that	this
strange	concept	of	‘sovereign	democracy’	should
serve	 to	 remind	 us	 that	 democracy	 is	 not
something	that	should	be	taken	for	granted.	Its
dogmatic	 status	 and	 refusal	 to	 acknowledge
alternatives	prevents	the	very	possibility	of	a	free
philosophical	discourse.
Democracy	 can	 be	 accepted,	 as	 well	 as

rejected.	It	can	be	established,	as	well	as	disposed
of.	History	has	known	perfect	societies	with	no
democracy	 and	 dreadful	 societies	 which	 had
democracy,	and	vice	versa.	Democracy	is	a	man-
made	 project,	 a	 construct,	 a	 plan,	 but	 not	 a
destiny.	It	can	be	rejected	or	accepted.	It	needs
validation,	 an	apologia.	 Without	 an	apologia,
democracy	will	have	no	sense.	An	undemocratic
form	of	government	should	not	be	considered	as
the	 worst	 possible	 form	 of	 government.	 The
‘lesser	 of	 two	 evils’	 formula	 is	 a	 propaganda
ploy.	 Democracy	 is	 not	 the	 lesser	 of	 evils...	 it
may	be	evil	and	may	not	be	evil	at	all.	Everything
requires	philosophical	consideration.	Only	on	the
basis	of	the	above	assumptions	is	it	possible	to
analyse	democracy	thoughtfully.
Let	 us	 consider	 the	 etymology	 of	 the	 word
demos,	 since	 democracy	 means	 ‘rule	 of	 the
demos’.	 Usually,	 this	 word	 is	 translated	 as
‘people’.	But	there	were	many	synonyms	of	the

word	 ‘people’	 in	 use	 in	 the	 Greek	 language:
ethnos,	laos,	phule,	and	so	on.	Demos	was	one	of
them,	 and	 it	 described	 a	 population:	 that	 is,
people	living	on	a	specific	territory.
Julius	   Pokorny’s
[143]
	   Indo-European
etymological	dictionary
[144]
	states	that	the	Greek
word	demos	 is	 derived	 from	 the	 Indo-European
root	 *	 dā	 (*dǝ-),	 which	 means	 ‘to	 share’,	 ‘to
divide’.	Therefore,	the	very	etymology	of	demos
refers	to	something	divided,	sliced	into	separate
fragments	and	placed	on	a	certain	territory.	The
Russian	 word	 with	 the	 closest	 meaning	 is
«население»,	 ‘population’,	 but	 not	 ‘people’,
because	‘people’	implies	a	cultural	and	linguistic
unity,	as	well	as	a	common	historical	existence
and	 a	 certain	 destiny	 (predestination).	 A
population	 can	 (theoretically)	 do	 without	 the
above.	A	‘population’	is	everyone	who	has	settled
or	has	been	settled	on	a	particular	territory,	but
not	 necessarily	 people	 who	 have	 roots	 or

citizenship	in	that	land.
Aristotle,	 who	 introduced	 the	 notion	 of
democracy,	had	a	somewhat	negative	attitude	to	it
in	 its	 ‘Greek’	 meaning.	According	 to	Aristotle,
‘democracy’	is	equivalent	to	‘rule	of	the	masses’
and	‘ochlocracy’	(mob	rule).	As	an	alternative	to
democracy,	 the	 worst	 form	 of	 government,
Aristotle	 discussed	 not	 only	 monarchy	 and
aristocracy	(‘the	rule	of	one’	or	‘the	rule	of	the
best’,	 which	 he	 viewed	 positively),	 but	 also
politeia	 (from	 the	 Greek	 ‘city-state’).	Politeia’,
much	 like	 ‘democracy’,	 is	 the	 rule	 of	 many,
although	not	on	an	indiscriminate	basis.	It	is	the
rule	 of	 qualified,	 conscientious	 citizens,	 who
stand	out	as	a	result	of	their	significant	cultural,
genealogical,	social	and	economic	characteristics.
Politeia	is	the	self-rule	of	citizens	on	the	basis	of
traditions	and	customs.	Democracy	is	a	chaotic
agitation	of	rebellious	 masses.	Politeia	involves
cultural	unity:	a	common	historical	and	religious

base	for	citizens.	Democracy	can	be	established
by	 an	 arbitrary	 set	 of	 atomised	 individuals,
‘divided’	into	random	sectors.	Aristotle,	in	fact,
mentions	other	forms	of	unjust	rule	—	tyranny
(the	rule	of	a	usurper)	and	oligarchy	(the	rule	of	a
small	group	of	rich	scoundrels	 and	 corruptors).
All	negative	forms	of	government	are	connected
with	 each	 other:	 tyrants	 often	 draw	 upon
democracy,	just	as	oligarchs	often	appeal	to	it.
Integrity,	which	is	so	important	for	Aristotle,	lies
within	 monarchy,	 aristocracy	 and	politeia.
Division,	fragmentation,	and	atomisation	are	on
the	side	of	democracy.
The	 idea	 of	 division	 and	 atomisation	 was
employed	 by	 modern	 philosophers	 to	 describe
human	 societies	 and	 the	 state	 of	 man	 himself.
With	 the	 concept	 of	 an	 ‘individual’,	 the
indivisible,	an	‘atom’,	modern	history	was	freed
from	 metaphysics,	 authority,	 the	 rule	 of	 the
Church	and	from	morals.	It	freed	humans	from

the	divine	care	of	theocentrism.
The	modern	era	has	established	itself	on	the
cult	 of	 ‘methodological	 individualism’,	 as
opposed	 to	 ‘methodological	 holism’.	 It	 is	 the
negation	of	the	Only	(God)	and	the	recognition	of
the	priority	of	the	Many	(individuals)	that	is	the
principal	 dogma	 of	 modernity	 and	 the	 main
hypothesis	 of	 the	 modern	 era.	 In	 the
postmodernism	of	our	times	this	thesis	remains
undisputed.
In	 this	 context,	 the	 concept	 of	 ‘sovereign
democracy’	in	Russian	politics	circa	2005-2007
meant	roughly	the	following:	the	Western	world
distributes	and	insists	on	democracy,	referring	to
a	 very	 specific	 model	 that	 was	 established	 in
Europe	in	the	modern	era.	It	is	built	around	the
principles	of	individualism	and	‘liberty	from’	—
principles	that	have	guided	Western	civilisation
for	almost	three	hundred	years,	since	the	modern
era	began.	Russia	is	a	non-individualistic	country;

its	history	and	culture	have	always	been	based	on
integrity,	 being	 united,	 the	 common,	 and	 the
collective	 (be	 it	 the	 people,	 communities,	 the
Church,	God,	the	state,	or	the	Empire).	Western
democracy	 does	 not	 suit	 Russia	 because	 it	 is
individualistic	and	is	based	on	a	rational,	goal-
oriented	 and	 assertive	 individual	 subject.	 We
must	have	our	own	democracy	—	one	that	takes
into	 account	 the	 peculiarities	 of	 our	 national
pattern	 and	 national	 history.	 This	 is	 what	 the
sovereignty	of	our	choice	and	of	our	democracy	is
about.
It	 is	 interesting	 to	 note	 the	 way	 these
arguments	by	Russian	political	commentators	had
touched	 upon	 the	 topic	 of	 a	 multipolar	 world
before	Vladimir	Putin	officially	spoke	of	it	in	his
2007	Munich	speech.
This	 speech	 was	 a	 turning	 point	 in	 Russian
history.	Its	content	was	a	direct	reflection	of	the
world	as	it	really	is:	America	is	waging	a	‘cool

war’	on	us.	Even	Western	political	scientists	have
said	the	same	thing.	The	fact	is	that	a	Cold	War	is
possible	only	in	the	case	of	a	fully	symmetrical
weapons	 system,	 meaning	 that	 the	 adversaries
must	control	equivalent	spaces.	For	now,	Russia
is	left	with	asymmetrical	answers	only.	There	is	a
possibility	that	this	war	can	become	a	‘warm	war’
or	 even	 a	 ‘hot	 war’	 at	 any	 moment.	 And	 the
anticipated	 attack	 on	 Iraq,	 which	 was	 in	 direct
opposition	to	Russia’s	strategic	interests,	was	a
step	 toward	 shifting	 the	 ‘cool	 war’	 into	 a	 hot
phase.	If	the	US	attacks	Syria	or	Iran,	America	is
actually	threatening	Russia.
Putin	said	it	all	in	his	Munich	speech,	thereby
evoking	a	shift	in	Russian	self-awareness.	Prior	to
the	 speech	 in	 Munich,	 we	 had	 spent	 15	 years
living	 under	 the	 impression	 that	 there	 was	 no
‘cool	 war’,	 thanks	 to	 our	 corrupt	 colonial
government.	 They	 had	 convinced	 us	 that	 there
was	 no	 unipolar	 world	 and	 that	 everybody	 was

working	toward	a	multipolar	world.	So,	after	this
period	 of	 intellectual	 frenzy	 in	 which	 Russia
found	 itself	 after	 Gorbachev	 and	 Yeltsin,	 the
country	 started	 to	 come	 to	 its	 senses.	 People
started	 to	 see	 things	 as	 they	 really	 are.	 The
‘period	of	confusion’	was	over.	In	and	of	itself,
this	 understanding	 of	 reality	 was	 actually	 quite
sad:	if	we	look	at	what	we	had	been	doing	for	two
decades	in	light	of	Putin’s	speech,	we	should	be
ashamed	of	ourselves.	We	had	put	ourselves	in
the	 hands	 of	 the	 occupation’s	 elite,	 which
consisted	 of	 oligarchs,	 pro-Westerners	 and
liberals	who	intentionally	destroyed	our	strategic
positions	 and	 tried	 to	 strip	 our	 country	 of	 its
sovereignty.
The	Munich	Speech:	A	Foundation	for
Geopolitics
It	would	not	be	an	overstatement	to	call	Putin’s
Munich	speech	a	historic	one.	It	had	been	decades

since	 a	 Russian	 leader	 spoke	 so	 clearly	 and
categorically	 about	 the	 future	 of	 international
politics.	 In	 Munich,	 Vladimir	 Putin	 declared
Russia’s	 principal	 stance	 as	 that	 of	 a	 world
geopolitical	force	in	the	future	world	order.	The
theses	voiced	by	Putin	briefly	covered,	succinctly
and	decisively,	the	conclusions	that	I	had	drawn
as	 far	 back	 as	 the	 mid-1990s	 in	 my	 book	The
Foundations	 of	 Geopolitics.	 The	 book	 was
devoted	to	the	fundamental	conflict	between	the
‘land	 civilisation’	 and	 the	 ‘sea	 civilisation’,
[145]
and	to	the	infeasibility	of	a	unipolar	world.	The
book	stressed	that	Russia	should	lead	the	forces
which	 would	 oppose	 unipolar	 globalisation	 and
the	 spreading	 of	 Atlanticism	 embodied	 in	 the
North	 Atlantic	 treaty	 (NATO).	 In	 Munich	 the
President	combined	these	fragmented	statements
into	 a	 concise	 and	 clear	 statement.	 In	 essence,
Putin	 expressed	 his	 readiness	 to	 oppose	 US
international	policy.

During	the	1980s,when	the	Soviet	Union	was
still	intact,	and	during	the	1990s,	when	the	Soviet
Union	disappeared	(and,	in	fact,	long	before	that,
since	Woodrow	Wilson	and	Theodore	Roosevelt),
America	 was	 taking	 strategic	 steps	 toward
creating	a	unipolar	world.	The	only	question	was
whether	 it	 would	 share	 this	 global	 sovereignty
with	other	countries	or	not.	Putin	challenged	the
contemporary	 state	 of	 affairs	 and	 the	 entire
course	 of	 international	 politics.	 When	 such
statements	 were	 made	 by	 Hugo	 Chávez,	 Kim
Jong-il	or	Ahmadinejad,	they	were	easily	brushed
off	 (although	 Ahmadinejad	 stood	 apart).	 When
they	 are	 made	 by	 Russia,	 they	 are	 a	 game-
changer.
When	 a	 country	 that	 possesses	 the	 second-
largest	nuclear	arsenal	in	the	world,	occupies	a
huge	territory,	controls	energy	resources,	and	has
a	 lengthy	 history	 of	 a	 national	 mission	 and
opposition	—	essentially	a	‘country-continent’,	a

civilisation	 —	 challenges	 the	 United	 States,
NATO,	 the	 Energy	 Charter
[146]
	 and	 the	 entire
world	order,	it	means	that	all	masks	come	off.
Putin	 stated	 that	 the	 unipolar	 world	 was
absolutely	 inadmissible,	 and	 that	 the	 ballistic
missile	defence	system	that	is	being	created	in
Europe	 by	 the	 US,	 cannot	 be	 directed	 at	 North
Korea	 —	 it	 is	 directed	 at	 us.	 Russia	 strongly
opposes	the	construction	of	the	BMD	system	and
cannot	ignore	it.	Putin	said	that	NATO	is	not	a
partner	 but	 an	 enemy	 who	 is	 destabilising	 the
political	environment	throughout	its	entire	sphere
of	 influence,	 and	 that	 the	 Energy	 Charter	 that
Europe	 is	 forcing	 upon	 us,	 intending	 to	 ensure
access	to	Russian	energy	resources	without	giving
Russia	 access	 to	 European	 energy	 resources	 in
return,	 is	 a	 humiliating,	 occupation-style
agreement:	‘You	give	us	everything	and	we	give
you	 nothing.’	 That’s	 the	 way	 people	 negotiate
with	 losers,	 who	 are	 expected	 to	 submit	 to	 the

winner’s	 will.	 Putin	 essentially	 declared	 that
Russia	would	be	challenging	the	world	order	and
paving	the	way	for	a	geopolitical	revolution	—	no
more,	no	less.
Putin’s	Mandate	for	a	Revolution	in
Consciousness
The	results	of	the	2001	all-Russian	poll	conducted
by	 the	 Sociology	 Department	 at	 Lomonosov
Moscow	State	Linguistic	University	established,
among	 other	 things,	 that	 Vladimir	 Putin	 had
higher	 approval	 ratings	 than	 any	 other	 Russian
decision-maker.	This	was	not	extraordinary	at	all.
Its	 main	 peculiarity	 was	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 was
conducted	 at	 the	 initiative	 of	 academic
sociologists	and	not	in	any	way	connected	with
political	circles,	nor	rigged	by	the	government	or
the	opposition.
I	would	like	to	focus	on	an	interpretation	of
several	items	in	the	poll.	Let	me	start	by	saying

that	this	interpretation	is	subjective	and	can	easily
be	disputed	by	other	commentators.
My	conclusion	may	seem	radical:	there	is	no
democracy	in	Russia,	I	don’t	see	it	coming,	and	it
cannot	be	and	should	not	exist	in	Russia.	What	is
the	 basis	 of	 such	 an	 opinion?	 The	 basis	 is	 the
profile	 of	 the	 average	 Russian,	 which	 was
obtained	during	the	poll	and	which	fully	confirms
the	conclusions	of	my	long-term	analysis	of	the
society	we	live	in	from	an	insider’s	perspective.	
The	results	show	that	a	significant	percentage	of
Russians	 still	 trust	 the	 authorities,	 and	 that	 the
majority	 of	 Russians	 associate	 ‘the	 authorities’
with	Vladimir	Putin.	This	is	a	stable	monarchic
trend,	 reflecting	 the	 fact	 that	 a	 powerful
authoritarian	figure	is	in	high	demand.	Does	Putin
comply	 with	 these	 expectations?	 I	 am	 more
inclined	 to	 say	 ‘yes’	 than	 ‘no’,	 and	 Russian
society	 fills	 in	 the	 missing	 gaps,	 not	 in
accordance	with	any	serious	analysis	but	rather	on

the	 basis	 of	 an	 inherent,	 deeply-rooted	 belief
system.
Putin	 is	 seen	 through	 the	 prism	 of	 a	 family
metaphor:	a	state	is	subconsciously	perceived	as	a
‘big	 family’,	 and	 its	 head	 as	 ‘the	 father’.	 In	 a
family	 structure,	 the	 father	 possesses	 a	 stable
authoritarian	status,	which	means	the	rest	of	the
family	is	submissive	and	complicit	in	enhancing
the	father’s	authority	instead	of	undermining	it.
When	the	personality	of	the	head	of	 state	 or	 a
national	 leader	 makes	 this	 dynamic	 possible,
demonstrating	 at	 least	 some	 of	 the	 required
virtues,	the	public	consciousness	fills	in	all	of	the
missing	elements	until	the	model	of	patriarchal
authoritarianism	 is	 complete.	 The	 initiative
comes	from	the	people	—	an	expression	of	stable
and	  traditionally	  established	  ‘monarchic’
attitudes.	 It	 is	 this	 monarchic	 tendency	 of	 the
masses	 that	 creates	 conditions	 for	 authoritarian
rule,	thus	liquidating	the	substance	of	democracy

via	a	democratic	process	and	giving	power	back
to	the	authorities	represented	by	the	father	figure.
This	 is	 a	 striking	 characteristic	 of	 a	 traditional
society	which	shines	through	a	democratic	façade.
And	 this,	 as	 has	 been	 repeatedly	 stated	 by	 the
scientists	conducting	the	poll,	does	not	diminish
the	 legitimacy	 or	 legality	 of	 the	 democratic
procedure.	Monarchy	in	Russia	can	easily	be	legal
and	 legitimate	 within	 the	 framework	 of	 a
democratic	procedure	which	would	function	as	a
kind	 of	zemsky	 sobor.
[147]
	 Thus	 we	 are	 dealing
with	a	sort	of	‘plebiscitary	authoritarianism’	—	a
monarchy	 that	 is	 a	 voluntary	 legacy	 of	 the
masses.
This	 poll	 clearly	 demonstrates	 that	 Russians
remain	 quite	 critical	 as	 well.	 For	 instance,	 the
assessment	 of	 government	 activity	 was	 three
times	lower	than	the	assessment	of	its	head	(Putin
was	Prime	Minister	at	the	time).	Here	we	see	a
conscious	scepticism	toward	the	actual	deeds	of

the	government,	which	are	assessed	realistically
and	 critically	 and	 then	 acknowledged	 to	 be
ineffective,	 poorly	 managed,	 and	 generally
wrong.	 Concern	 about	 economic	 development,
unemployment,	  safety,	  corruption,	  and
deteriorating	 ecology	 are	 common	 sentiments
among	a	significant	share	of	the	respondents.	In
other	words,	the	people	fully	understand	what	is
happening	 and	 do	 not	 approve	 (at	 least,
substantially)	of	the	prevailing	course.	Yet,	there
are	a	large	percentage	of	people	who	are	happy
with	 everything.	 Given	 that	 the	 scientists	 who
conducted	the	poll	were	not	politically	motivated,
this	‘happiness’	is	likely	a	genuine	reflection	of
public	 sentiment.	 The	 bottom	 line	 is	 that,
according	 to	 the	 poll,	 the	 people	 trust	 Putin,
recognise	 his	 right	 to	 take	 decisive	 action,	 and
demand	that	he	exercise	this	right.
Putin	is	on	the	threshold	of	a	new	role	—	as	a
‘man	of	destiny.’	Such	were	de	Gaulle,	Churchill,

and	Stalin.	The	new	Putin	draws	his	power	from
society,	is	guided	by	geopolitics,	defends	national
interests,	rises	to	the	challenges	of	history,	and
lives	and	acts	under	the	formula	‘I	am	the	state,
the	people	and	the	society.’	This	role	is	reinforced
by	 another	 existing	 tendency	 to	 establish	 a
monarchy,	a	legitimised	trend	that	is	emanating
from	the	people,	from	below.	Will	the	new	Putin
comply	 with	 legislative	 regulations?	 This	 is
possible	but	not	essential,	because	up	to	this	point
he	has	very	carefully	employed	even	the	powers
legally	 granted	 to	 him	 under	 the	 auspices	 of	 a
presidential	republic.	Given	that	‘the	people’	are
the	 most	 important	 category,	 the	 state	 must	 be
‘dissolved’	in	the	people	and	then	reconstructed
from	the	bottom	up.	And	it	must	be	done	with	the
help	 of	our	Putin,	who	can	even	be	deified	(we
should	not	spare	anything	for	the	sake	of	a	great
cause)	so	that	he	can	perform	great	deeds	calmly
and	steadily,	without	bothering	himself	with	petty

‘elections’.	We	must	grant	Putin	the	status	of	the
‘Sun	King’
[148]
	and	strengthen	his	rule	in	tandem
with	a	reformed	and	flexible	xenomorphic	elite,
who	 will	 swear	 allegiance	 to	 the	 great	 Russian
people.	And	only	then	will	we	be	able	to	revive
the	great	empire.

3.	Putin’s	Test
Putin	against	the	‘Sisters’
T h e	Nord-Ost	 events
[149]
	 became	 yet	 another
serious	test	for	Vladimir	Putin,	on	par	with	the
9/11	 terrorist	 attacks.	 On	 22	 October	 2002,	 the
terrorists,	holding	hostages,	challenged	the	future
of	 Russia,	 the	 political	 regime	 and	 Vladimir
Putin.	 For	 two	 days,	 the	 future	 of	 the	 Russian
state	 was	 uncertain.	 This	 was	 not	 simply	 a
terrorist	 attack,	 it	 was	 a	 genuine	 attempt	 at	 a
coup.	Not	an	ideological	one,	as	was	the	case	with
the	Civil	Forum,	but	a	genuine	one	—	hot	and
brutal.	At	that	point,	Putin’s	credibility	was	based
on	his	political	and	‘strong-arm’	reaction	against
the	 Moscow	 attacks	 and	 guerrilla	 actions	 in
Dagestan	 during	 1999.	 The	 Russian	 people
accepted	and	elected	Putin	precisely	for	the	way
he	acted	in	that	particular	situation;	it	became	the

basis	 of	 the	 national	 consensus	 regarding	 his
legitimacy.	In	his	response	to	the	challenge	from
the	 Chechen	 separatists,	 Putin	 outlined	 a	 new
‘agenda’	 for	 post-Yeltsin	 Russian	 politics.	 This
agenda,	to	put	it	briefly,	was	the	following:	‘The
inherent	value	and	integrity	of	the	Russian	state
must	 not	 be	 questioned.’	 Putin	 backed	 this
premise	 with	 his	 first	 steps	 as	 President,	 and
Russian	society	—	the	intelligentsia,	the	media,
the	Chechens,	Tatarstan,	the	governors,	the	Duma
—	had	to	follow	it.	However,	after	implementing
its	first	radical	measures	(the	introduction	of	the
federal	districts,	the	Federation	Council	reform,
the	expulsions,	as	well	as	the	restraining	of	the
geopolitically	scheming	oligarchs),	Putin	did	not
immediately	 back	 his	 early	 endeavours	 with
decisive	action.	His	hesitation	led	all	the	players
in	the	political	process	to	believe	that	we	were
retreating	 back	 to	 the	 late	 Yeltsin	 period,
especially	 since	 the	 delay	 in	 implementing

reforms	 was	 accompanied	 by	 geopolitical
concessions	to	the	US	(which	became	especially
evident	after	the	events	of	9/11).	It	seemed	that
Putin’s	reforms	had	been	rolled	back.
It	appears	that	certain	geopolitical	forces,	as
well	 as	 domestic	 opposition	 —	 separatists,
Islamists,	several	oligarchs,	and	so	on	—	thought
that	the	 time	 had	 come	 to	 seriously	 destabilise
Putin’s	Russia.	They	resolved	to	challenge	Putin
and	Russia,	which	led	to	the	tragic	events	at	the
Dubrovka	theatre.	Curiously	enough,	it	is	obvious
that	everyone	 but	 the	 Chechens	 themselves	 had
political	 interests	 in	 this	 terrorist	 attack.	 For
some	period	of	time	leading	up	to	the	tragedy	at
Dubrovka,	Chechnya	had	accepted	Putin’s	rules
of	the	game.	The	Chechens	and	their	leaders	had
been	 actively	 and	 almost	 enthusiastically
cooperating	 with	 the	 authorities	 and	 law
enforcement.	 Northern	 Chechnya	 had	 fully
recognised	 the	 legitimacy	 of	 federal	 rule,	 and

even	 the	 majority	 of	 field	 commanders	 had
entered	into	a	kind	of	symbiosis	with	the	Russian
Army,	in	one	way	or	another,	which	sometimes
seemed	almost	paradoxical.	A	political	solution
to	 the	 Chechen	 issue	 was	 a	 priority	 on	 the
national	 agenda,	 and	 the	 majority	 of	 Chechens
had	 found	 the	 solutions	 to	 be	 agreeable.	 This
attack	put	an	end	to	all	of	this	in	the	blink	of	an
eye.	 From	 then	 on,	 Chechens	 could	 no	 longer
aspire,	even	in	theory,	to	obtain	the	status	of	a
‘political	subject’.	They	no	longer	had	rights	as	a
people,	and	only	their	citizens’	rights	remained.
Chechens	 no	 longer	 exist	 as	 an	ethnos	 in	 the
political	sense,	and	this	will	remain	the	case	for	a
long	time.	As	for	Islam,	the	forces	that	challenged
Vladimir	Putin	and	Russia	cannot	have	stemmed
directly	 from	 the	 Islamic	 realm.	 Islam	 as	 a
civilisation	 is	 very	 weak	 in	 certain	 aspects;	 it
urgently	needs	partners	to	realise	its	geopolitical
ambitions	—	Russia,	Europe,	the	Asian	countries,

and	 other	 prospective	 participants	 of	 the
multipolar	 world.	 Islamism,	 Islamic	 radicalism,
Wahhabism,	 and	 Al	 Qaeda	 all	 act	 against
Muslims’	interests	and	against	the	Ummah,
[150]
	in
the	name	of	the	ideals	of	their	own	heretical	sect
(the	 so-called	 ‘pure	 Islam’,	 which	 could	 be
dubbed	Islamic	Protestantism)	and	for	the	benefit
of	 the	 Atlanticist	 unipolar	 world.	 The	 mission
carried	out	by	Islamic	terrorists	is	not	a	Muslim
one,	but	rather	that	of	their	opponents,	advancing
the	interests	of	those	against	whom	their	struggle
is	 supposedly	 directed.	 Islamists	 and	 their
institutions	  —	  various	  ‘international’
organisations	and	‘Islamic	committees’	—	must
be	wiped	out.	This	is	in	the	best	interests	both	of
humanity	in	general	and	of	Muslims	themselves.
By	attacking	Moscow,	these	forces	acted	against
the	interests	of	Islam.	In	the	West,	especially	in
the	US,	opinions	about	the	Putin	regime	at	the
outset	 of	 his	 presidency	 were	 divided.	 Some

experts	thought	that	Putin	was	acceptable	for	the
West	and	sufficiently	loyal	to	the	US.	The	other
camp	 —	 Brzezinski,	 Wolfowitz,	 and	 so	 on	 —
were	convinced	that	Putin	was	merely	appeasing
the	 West	 in	 order	 to	 give	 Russia	 a	 break	 it
desperately	 needed,	 and	 that	 the	 country	 would
soon	 rise	 again.	 Backed	 by	 some	 anti-Putin
circles	comprised	of	former	and	current	Russian
citizens,	 this	 second	 camp	 decided	 to	 cynically
test	the	condition	of	Putin’s	system,	which	had,
judging	by	certain	external	characteristics,	started
to	 crack.	 The	Nord-Ost	attack	became	a	reality
check	of	sorts,	much	like	the	Georgian	attack	on
South	Ossetia	in	August	2008.
It	 is	 obvious	 that	 the	 Dubrovka	 attack	 was
instigated	 by	 these	 geopolitical	 forces.	 The
Chechen	Islamists	(note	that	Movsar	Barayev
[151]
had	been	spawned	by	the	Islamist	al-Khattab
[152]
and	 his	 assistant,	 who	 were,	 as	 is	 well-known
today,	working	for	the	CIA)	played	into	the	hands

of	the	Atlanticists.	The	TV	channels	showed	the
‘sisters’,	wrapped	in	black	cloth	with	only	their
eyes	visible:	they	were	Arabic,	not	Chechen.	It
later	 emerged	 that	 the	 supporting	 infrastructure
for	the	terrorists	in	Moscow	was	not	the	Chechen
diaspora	at	all.	When	the	terrorists	implemented
the	first	part	of	their	plan,	many	things	became
evident.	Again,	as	during	Yeltsin’s	last	years,	the
so-called	   ‘democratic’	   politicians	   —
Khakamada,
[153]
	 Nemtsov,	 Yavlinsky,	 Kobzon,
even	old	Primakov	—	popped	up,	reanimated	by
the	 residual	 media	 influence	 of	 the	 exiled
oligarchs.	 The	 forgotten	 slogans	 of	 the	 human
rights	 activists,	 such	 as	 ‘No	 to	 the	 war	 in
Chechnya’,	reappeared.	Had	this	campaign	been
allowed	to	continue,	Putin’s	political	legitimacy
would	have	been	lost	forever,	and	we	would	now
be	living	in	an	entirely	different	kind	of	country.
This	is	what	the	wicked	plot	was	about:	to	expose
Putin	as	indecisive	when	it	came	to	key	issues	and

to	make	Russia	irrelevant	again,	just	like	in	the
Yeltsin	era.
The	grave	reality	of	this	challenge	was	marked
by	another	complication	as	well:	had	the	hostages
died	during	the	attack,	Putin	would	most	likely
have	had	to	make	his	case	by	employing	measures
he	was	psychologically	unprepared	for.	Besides,	it
could	have	provoked	an	uncontrollable	upsurge	of
unbridled	 national	 anger	 and	 ethnic	 tensions,
which	 would	 have	 brought	 the	 country	 to	 the
verge	of	a	civil	war.	The	attack’s	organisers	had
planned	 everything	 perfectly:	 this	 kind	 of
challenge	would	be	too	much	for	the	system	set
up	 by	 Putin,	 which	 was	 clearly	 unable	 to	 cope
with	 much	 easier	 tasks	 in	 more	 favourable
situations	and	appeared	to	have	been	altogether
stagnant	for	several	years.	Vladimir	Putin	would
have	been	forced	to	back	his	radical	decision	with
a	series	of	political	measures	so	drastic	that	they
would	have	been	crippling	to	the	country	and	the

Russian	people.	There	was	only	one	thing	to	do:
to	walk	through	a	dangerous	passage,	a	decision
reminiscent	of	the	Symplegades.
[154]
During	  the	Nord-Ost	incident,	 Putin,	 the
political	 regime	 and	 Russia	 as	 a	 whole	 were
rescued	 by	 the	 secret	 service.	At	 the	 time,	 law
enforcement	 managed	 to	 resolve	 a	 seemingly
unmanageable	situation.	On	26	October	2002,	700
hostages	were	saved.	But	they	weren’t	the	only
ones:	Russia	was	saved	too.
During	the	tragic	events	at	Dubrovka,	the	best
coverage	 by	 the	 TV	 channels	 (who	 helped
Vladimir	Putin,	the	people	and	law	enforcement)
turned	out	to	be	Channel	One	and	Russia.	They
stood	up	to	the	challenge	and	demonstrated	that
they	truly	were	national	media.	TVC,	on	the	other
hand,	 did	 not.	 It	 seemed	 that	 the	 then-mayor
Luzhkov	had	been	waiting	all	along	for	Kremlin
to	lose	its	footing.	Overall,	it	became	evident	that
we,	 together	 with	 Putin,	 had	 come	 a	 long	 way

since	 Yeltsin.	 Until	 1999,	 the	 terrorists	 would
have	been	allowed	to	hold	press	conferences	on
all	the	Russian	channels,	to	talk	with	‘Kasyanov’
and	‘Putin’	on	the	phone,	and	to	shoot	hostages...
Nord-Ost	also	served	as	a	test	for	Putin	because	it
demonstrated	yet	again	that	the	North	Caucasus
issue	 and	 security	 in	 general	 did	 not	 depend
solely	 on	 law	 enforcement	 agencies	 or	 the
international	 community.	 It	 was	 also	 bogged
down	 by	 the	 corruption	 of	 the	 political	 class,
including	 the	 military.	 Resolving	 this	 issue	 is
impossible	 without	 a	concrete	 and	 substantial
revolution	 in	 the	 political	 cadres.	 Today,	 this
revolution	is	inevitable.
Temptation	by	the	Void
Aside	from	the	immediate	external	and	domestic
challenges	 and	 emergencies,	 Putin	 also	 had	 to
cope	with	the	‘illusion	of	peace’:	a	challenge	in
mentality.	The	liberal,	nationalist	and	Communist

forces	 were	 so	 marginalised	 and	 dispersed	 that
they	 no	 longer	 posed	 a	 threat	 to	 anyone,	 and
Russian	 society	 exhibited	 all	 the	 signs	 of	 a
political	 consensus.	 This	 illusory	 political
reconciliation	had	mostly	been	fabricated	by	spin
doctors.	 The	 Kremlin	 spin	 doctors,	 primarily
Vladislav	 Surkov,	 had	 exploited	 the	 fact	 that
Russian	 partisan	 and	 political	 life	 in	 the	 1990s
was	 in	 itself	 artificial,	 ‘theatrical’	 and
manipulative	to	elevate	this	farce	to	the	point	of
absurdity.
De-politisation	became	the	foundation	of	the
‘new	 policy’.	 It	 is	 worth	 noting	 that	 Russian
political	parties	do	not	exhibit	so	much	as	a	trace
of	 a	 consistent	 political	 philosophy,	 and	 are
comprised	mostly	of	arbitrary	conglomerates	and
populist	slogans.	Russian	political	parties	do	not
have	 ideological	 magazines,	 institutions,	 proper
expert	centres,	or	funds	for	intellectual	projects.
De-politisation	 had	 rendered	 Putin	 virtually	 the

single	most	important	political	object,	providing
him	with	limitless	political	freedom.	Much	like
Louis	XIV,
[155]
	Putin	can	easily	claim:	‘I	am	the
state.’	 This	 situation,	 in	 turn,	 begs	 yet	 another
question:	 ‘If	 Putin	 IS	 the	 state,	 what	 is	 the
political	substance	of	Putin	himself?’	Of	course,
the	 majority	 of	 Russians	 implicitly	 understand
Putin:	Putin	is	for	Russia,	Putin	is	not	Yeltsin,
Putin	is	against	oligarchy,	Putin	supports	Gross
Domestic	Product	(GDP)	growth,	Putin	is	against
violations,	 terrorism	 and	 extremism,	 Putin
supports	modernisation,	Putin	is	independent	and
self-sufficient,	 Putin	 is	 powerful	 —	 sometimes
cruel,	sometimes	tolerant.
The	dismantling	of	the	political	constructs	that
were	 subject	 to	 demolition	 as	 a	 result	 of	 this
process	was	now	over.	It	was	tactful	to	inform	the
public	 about	 the	 second,	 positive	 half	 of	 the
programme	 in	 small	 doses	 during	 the	 previous
stage.	This	tactic	demoralised	Putin’s	opponents.

But	the	situation	had	changed,	significantly	and
profoundly.	  That	  which	  constituted	  an
achievement	 during	 the	 previous	 stage	 —	 de-
politisation	 —	 had	 turned	 into	 a	 threat,	 an
obstacle,	and	a	challenge.
In	 other	 words,	 the	 main	 subject	 of	 Russian
politics,	Vladimir	Vladimirovich	Putin,	was	faced
with	a	dilemma:	to	build	a	new	and	substantial
political	 structure	 from	 scratch,	 delegating	 the
development	of	an	organic,	consistent	ideology,
national	strategy,	and	political	philosophy	to	his
supporters	 (United	 Russia,	 the	 government,	 the
Parliament	 and	 the	 Federation	 Council),	 or	 to
leave	everything	as	it	was,	suspending	the	status
quo	 and	 merely	 pulling	 the	 strings	 of	 obedient
and	 effectively	 powerless	 puppets.	 This	 choice
was	 not	 self-evident,	 and	 either	 choice	 carried
with	it	a	certain	amount	of	risk.	If	Putin	resolved
to	build	a	meaningful	policy	—	a	proper	strategy
with	ideological	backing	—	he	would	invest	his

personal	capital	in	a	political	system	that	would
be	able	to	function	and	develop	on	its	own.	In	this
case,	Putin	would	share	his	concentrated	political
power	with	others:	not	only	with	his	followers,
but	also	with	the	oppositional	forces	who	would
obtain	ideological	legitimacy	and	the	possibility
of	a	succinct	ideological	and	political	dialogue.
The	 risks	 for	 Putin	 are	 evident	 but	 such	 is	 the
price	for	a	place	in	history,	for	the	creation	of
something	  bigger	  than	  one’s	  individual
personality	and	for	the	most	fantastic	career.
There	was	another	option:	the	‘conservation	of
a	 void’.	 Putin	 could	 have	 left	 the	 current
techniques	that	imitate	politics	and	the	opposition
intact,	continuing	to	substitute	a	show	for	reality:
a	nervous	show	of	the	manifestation	of	social	and
economic	interests,	and	a	repulsive	imitation	of
genuine	democracy.	This	would	ultimately	have
disappointed	his	supporters,	the	intellectual	class
and	the	greater	public.	Putin	would	have	had	to

make	his	way	toward	political	meanings,	and	to
uncover	the	secret	nature	of	real	substance.
During	 his	 first	 eight	 years	 in	 office,	 Putin
totally	dismantled	Yeltsin’s	political	system.	He
didn’t	transform	or	modify	the	system:	he	totally
demolished	it.	He	broke	down	all	aspects	of	the
farce,	unravelled	all	the	intrigue	created	by	the
opposition,	 and	 stopped	 everything	 that	 was
moving	 in	 a	 suspicious	 direction,	 and	 he	 was
successful	 in	 all	 respects.	 The	 unruly	 oligarchs
were	 exiled	 and	 imprisoned.	 The	 national
patriotic	 camp	 that	 the	 Yeltsin	 authorities	 had
only	grappled	with	was	crushed.	The	governors
and	 members	 of	 the	 Federation	 Council	 were
reined	 in.	Alexander	 Voloshin,	 the	 all-powerful
master	of	political	visions,	disappeared	without	a
trace.	He	was	followed	by	the	Yeltsin	negotiator
Kasyanov,	 who	 was	 dismissed	 along	 with	 his
cabinet.	Khodorkovsky	went	to	jail,	and	the	rest
of	Yeltsin’s	cronies	followed	suit.	The	SPS	and

Yabloko	 vanished	 from	 the	 Duma.	 Kudrin’s
government,	an	epitome	of	the	liberal	bloc,	was
deposed.	 Vladislav	 Surkov	 was	 dismissed.
Anatoly	Chubais	alone	awaits	his	share	of	thanks.
Putin	 is	 now	 free	 from	 adversaries,
competitors,	enemies	and	opponents.	There	is	an
empty	void	around	him.	And	it	is	this	void	that	is
his	principal	enemy,	the	subject	of	dialogue,	the
chief	adversary	and	his	primary	opponent.	Putin
is	destined	to	fight	the	void.
‘A	big	country’	is	a	viable	alternative	to	the
void:	not	as	an	adversary,	but	as	Putin’s	support
system	that	would	serve	to	accompany	Putin	as	a
testament,	 a	 mission	 and	 a	 higher	 aim.	 The
country	hates	the	government,	the	officials,	and
the	 people	 who	 have	 effectively	 gotten	 rid	 of
politics,	 transforming	 the	 bureaucracy	 into	 a
single	ruling	class	and	destroying	our	culture,	the
economy	and	the	entire	social	sphere.	If	it	came
to	 pass	 that	 the	 President	 shot	 the	 government

dead,	the	people	would	be	happy.	Putin	is	only
now	 morphing	 into	 the	 ‘real’	 Putin,	 having
confirmed	the	decisiveness	of	his	transformation
with	very	concrete	and	convincing	steps	that	are
clear	to	the	people	and	to	the	political	elites.	We
will	try	and	observe	the	Putin	who	has	emerged
out	 of	 these	 decisions	 —	 a	 hero,	 who	 has
overcome	the	void.	The	Putin	beyond	the	void.
Our	Eurasian	Putin.
Putin	and	the	Void	II:	Political
Solitude
In	the	months	leading	up	to	the	2012	elections,
everyone	knew	that	President	Putin	would	be	re-
elected.	And	it	was	evident	to	everybody	that	the
process	would	not	be	an	election	per	se,	but	rather
a	nationwide	confirmation	of	Putin’s	mandate	as
the	 national	 leader.	 Putin	 did	 not	 have	 genuine
opponents	or	a	viable	opposition.	Putin	was	alone.
He	was	countered	by	a	nothing	—	a	void.	And

while	this	was	undoubtedly	a	good	thing,	this	void
carried	with	it	hidden	risks	and	dangers,	posing	an
invisible,	 and	 therefore	 all	 the	 more	 fearsome,
threat.
He	Slightly	Gathered	Russia
[156]
As	 I	 noted	 above,	 Putin	 did	 not	 obtain	 his
landslide	win	in	the	blink	of	an	eye.	He	gained	his
first	wave	of	supporters	by	taking	a	tough	stance
on	Chechnya	—	a	move	that	contrasted	sharply
with	the	slack	and	disjointed	management	style
that	 characterised	 Yeltsin’s	 presidency.	 The
people	realised	that	Putin	intended	to	‘put	Russia
back	together’,	assuming	that	he	would	retain	our
new	 liberal	 economy,	 continue	 carrying	 out
market	 reforms,	 and	 maintain	 cordial	 relations
with	 the	 West.	 This	 strategy	 was	 accepted	 by
virtually	all	of	the	top	politicians	in	Russia.	His
tough	superpower	style	struck	a	chord	with	the
patriots,	and	even	with	the	Communists.	At	the

same	 time,	 his	 liberalism	 and	 his	 moderate
policies	oriented	toward	the	West	impressed	the
liberals.	At	the	time,	Putin	embodied	a	consensus
between	the	elites.	But	the	Putin	of	that	time	was
different	 from	 today’s	 Putin,	 the	 one	 who
emerged	after	the	start	of	his	second	presidency.
The	Structure	of	Non-Void
How	did	Vladimir	Putin	arrive	at	this	pre-election
void?	 Consider	 that	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 his
presidency,	he	was	surrounded	by	the	following
actors:	 ‘the	 Family’,	 a	 group	 of	 people	 with
immense	 influence	 who	 ruled	Yeltsin’s	 Russia;
the	regional	barons,	who	were	united	structurally
under	 a	 single	 influential	 organisation,	 the
Federation	 Council,	 and	 politically	 under	 the
moderately	oppositional	party	Fatherland	—	All
Russia;	 national	 republics	 that	 were	 steadily
gaining	  independence	  from	  the	  central
government,	 such	 as	 Tatarstan,	 Bashkiria,

Chuvashia,	Sakha,	and	others;	the	unquenchable
(as	it	seemed	at	the	time)	hotbed	of	separatism
and	 terror	 that	 was	 Chechnya;	 powerful	 media
owners	who	could	distort	the	truth	to	serve	their
own	 ends;	 large	 clans	 of	 oligarchs	 who	 were
backed	by	international	interests	and	corporations
and	had	all	but	complete	independence	from	the
national	administration,	acting	as	‘transnational’
and	‘extraterritorial’	entities;	and	the	influential
political	opposition	parties,	which	were	aspiring
to	establish	a	dialogue	both	with	the	Right	(the
SPS,	Yabloko)	and	the	Left	(the	CPRF).	Vladimir
Putin	 spent	 his	 first	 two	 terms	 methodically
reducing	the	number	of	these	independent	actors.
Today,	  this	  mission	  has	  been	  largely
accomplished:	 government	 independence	 from
‘the	 Family’	 has	 been	 achieved;	 the	 Federation
Council	 has	 been	 reformed;	 Fatherland	 —	 All
Russia	has	been	fused	into	the	pro-Putin	United
Russia	party	that	obeys	Putin	without	question;

the	national	republics,	inch	by	inch,	are	giving	up
on	claims	of	sovereignty	and	have	stopped	trying
to	 engage	 in	 confrontations	 with	 the	 centre;
Chechnya	 has	 been	 won	 back	 and	 is	 generally
subdued	 and	 restored;	 the	 most	 notorious
oligarchs	have	been	driven	out	of	the	country	or
imprisoned;	 the	 SPS	 does	 not	 exist	 anymore,
Yabloko	is	not	represented	in	the	Parliament,	and
the	CPRF	has	been	silenced	both	organisationally
and	 morally.	 Putin	 is	 left	 to	 face	 no	 one	 but
himself.
What	Next?
The	question	that	is	especially	pressing	today	is
not	the	question	the	West	keeps	asking	—	‘Who
is	Mr	Putin?’	—	but	the	Russian	one:	‘What	next,
Vladimir	 Vladimirovich?’	 In	 order	 to	 find	 an
answer,	let	us	take	a	closer	look	at	the	uniting
factor	 behind	 all	 of	 the	 forces	 that	 have
disappeared	 from	 the	 forefront	 of	 Russian

politics,	 and	 whose	 absence	 has	 created	 a	 new
threat:	the	threat	of	the	void.	The	forces	that	had
been	active	during	the	first	eight	years	of	Putin’s
presidency	as	‘independent	actors’	can	generally
be	 referred	 to	 as	 ‘the	 forces	 of	 disintegration’.
They	 emerged	 from	 the	 ruins	 of	 the	 empire,
having	 contributed	 to	 its	 disappearance,	 and
exploited	 the	 social	 momentum	 created	 by	 its
disappearance	 (including	 that	 of	 the	 economy,
state,	culture,	society,	and	nation)	and	planned	to
foster	 even	 greater	 destructive	 forces	 in	 the
future.	They	positioned	themselves	as	‘strangers’
to	 Russia,	 as	 opportunists.	 Metaphorically
speaking,	 the	 oligarchs,	 the	 liberals,	 the
separatists,	 and	 the	 pro-Western	 democrats	 and
media	tycoons	all	bet	on	the	downfall	of	Russia	as
a	corporation,	and	sold	her	shares	at	well	below
the	market	price,	preparing	the	ground	for	a	‘total
liquidation’.	 They	 acted	 as	 various	 departments
working	 together	 on	 a	 single	 operation:	 the

‘selling	out’	of	our	nation.	They	were	influential
precisely	because	the	people	who	could	pay	up
were	abroad	during	those	dark	days,	and	the	order
to	 sell	 out	 the	 motherland	 in	 an	 ideological,
economic,	cultural	and	territorial	sense	ultimately
came	from	them.
Let	us	dispense	with	all	illusions:	the	sell-outs
agreed	 to	 put	 Putin	 in	 charge	 as	 a	 temporary
measure,	 assuming	 that	 they	 would	 remain	 in
control	of	the	government	and,	together	with	their
foreign	clients,	retain	the	management	structure.
But	 their	 calculations	 fell	 through.	 Putin
started	methodically	and	steadily	eradicating	the
main	actors	of	‘management	from	outside’	from
Russian	 politics,	 reducing	 their	 influence	 to	 a
critically	low	point.
The	‘Worms	That	Dieth	Not’
[157]
	and
Putin’s	New	Men
The	fact	that	Vladimir	Putin	has	completed	the

introductory	part	of	his	programme	is	undeniable.
The	 first	 presidential	 cycle	 was	 devoted	 to
making	 a	 clean	 slate	 of	 Russian	 politics,
completely	 eradicating	 the	 marked-up	 ‘rough
draft’	 we	 had	 inherited	 from	 his	 predecessor.
Putin	 passed	 with	 flying	 colours,	 and	 today,
before	the	elections,	he	finds	himself	in	a	curious
situation:	the	forces	of	evil	(in	their	most	vivid
and	aggressive	forms)	have	been	defeated,	but	the
future	of	Russia	is	completely	up	in	the	air.
Therefore,	the	void	described	in	this	text	is	a
very	complex	phenomenon.	First	of	all,	this	void
could	be	harbouring	the	seeds	of	new	oppositional
forces,	 and	 the	 oligarchs	 have	 already	 tried	 to
harness	 its	 force	 to	 ‘boycott	 the	 elections’	 in
2004.
[158]
	They	argued	that	the	fact	that	there	was
no	 viable	 alternative	 to	 Putin	 meant	 he	 was	 a
dictatorial	 figure,	 demonising	 him	 and	 turning
him	into	a	persona	non	grata	in	the	eyes	of	the
West.	 In	 other	 words,	 by	 failing	 to	 provide	 a

legitimate	competitor	for	the	election,	the	entire
band	of	losers	could	unify	under	a	single	excuse
in	an	attempt	to	sabotage	Putin,	taking	advantage
of	 any	 pitfalls	 in	 his	 presidential	 strategy	 and
tactics.	 But	 today,	 there	 is	 even	 less	 of	 a
possibility	of	an	alternative	to	Putin	then	there
had	been	back	then.
Putin	 was	 able	 to	 cope	 with	 the	 ‘election
boycott’	 of	 2012:
[159]
	 nominal	 and	 harmless
figures	were	put	forth	as	‘candidates’	from	the
ranks	 of	 the	 principal	 political	 forces,	 and	 the
façade	of	pluralism	was	successfully	maintained.
But,	 knowing	 the	 forces	 that	 are	 trying	 to
suppress	Russia	and	its	revival,	there	can	be	no
doubt	that	the	boycott	tactic	was	merely	the	first
step	 in	 a	 fully-fledged	 sabotage	 programme.
Since	 it	 failed	 to	 work,	 we	 can	 be	 sure	 that
another	strategy	will	emerge	from	the	void,	and
the	 next	 move	 might	 prove	 to	 be	 a	 lot	 more
difficult	to	manage.

Secondly,	the	void	is	a	draft	of	Putin’s	new
presidential	 programme	 —	 the	 new	 Putin,	 the
Putin	of	the	second	presidential	cycle,	the	Putin
of	the	future.	If	a	concrete	programme	exists,	it
indeed	 must	 be	 hidden	 for	 the	 time	 being.
Pretending	 that	 it	 is	 non-existent	 —	 ‘a	 blank
space’,	 so	 to	 speak	 —	 is	 the	 best	 political
strategy.	 Either	 during	 the	 election	 period	 or
immediately	after,	Putin	will	have	to	remove	this
disguise,	revealing	a	wonderful,	ingenious	model
of	our	great	motherland’s	revival,	sparkling	like
gold	in	the	morning	sunlight.	This	second	aspect
of	the	void	is	merely	a	secret	plan,	a	Russian	x-
file	covering	up	a	leap	towards	national	greatness.
I	think	this	kind	of	plan	most	likely	exists,	and	I
think	it	is	a	project	to	build	a	Eurasian	empire.
Otherwise,	what	would	be	the	point	of	it	all?
Third,	the	void	may	be	a	curtain,	behind	which
Putin’s	new	men	are	hiding.	Not	just	the	‘Peter
Guys’,	who	only	helped	the	President	to	clean	the

territory	of	old	rubble.	Putin’s	new	men	are	the
grapevine	of	a	secret	national	elite,	cultivated	in	a
laboratory	far	away	from	the	oligarchs,	political
clowns,	cynical	spin	doctors,	and	corrupt	puppets
of	 the	 Yeltsin	 system.	 Putin’s	 new	 men	 will
(possibly)	be	the	biggest	surprise	to	emerge	from
the	void.	I	know	some	things	about	them,	but	I	am
too	cautious	to	talk	about	them	just	yet.
Putin’s	Grey	Zone
Two	days	after	Vladimir	Putin’s	inauguration	into
his	 second	 term,	 the	 ill-omened	 explosion	 in
Grozny	that	took	the	life	of	Akhmad	Kadyrov
[160]
took	place.	It	was	a	bad	sign,	and	I	involuntarily
thought	to	myself,	‘What	if	Putin’s	luck	has	run
out?’	In	fact,	everything	had	panned	out	in	his
favour	 during	 his	 first	 term:	 Putin	 managed	 to
escape	the	9/11	crisis	and	the	events	at	Dubrovka
in	 the	 autumn	 of	 2002	 mostly	 unscathed.	 The
stable	oil	market	climate,	political	stabilisation,

the	taming	of	the	governors,	the	dispersal	of	his
political	opponents	and	tight	control	of	the	media
had	all	put	Putin	in	the	‘white	zone’,	a	time	when
he	 was	 completely	 unmarked	 by	 problems	 or
opponents.	 It	 seemed	 that	 everything	 was	 just
right	 for	 Putin,	 and,	 propelled	 by	 a	 steady
tailwind,	all	he	had	to	do	was	slightly	adjust	the
course.	Another	important	factor	—	contrast	—
was	also	working	in	Putin’s	favour.	The	previous
presidents,	Gorbachev	and	Yeltsin,	were	seen	by
the	 wider	 public	 as	 a	national	 catastrophe,	 an
absurdity	 bordering	 on	 insanity.	 The	 entire
history	 of	 Putin’s	 closest	 predecessors	 was	 a
history	 of	 never-ending	 losses,	 concessions,
disgrace	 and	 deterioration.	 Before	 he	 came	 to
power,	the	state	and	its	geopolitical	influence	had
been	 shrinking	 before	 our	 very	 eyes.	 During
Yeltsin’s	presidency,	the	Kremlin	turned	 into	 a
hotbed	 of	 drunken	 frenzy,	 an	 oligarch	 rat	 race
marked	 by	 the	 total	 deterioration	 of	 the	 strong

values	of	the	state.	In	light	of	all	this,	Putin	had
been	received	by	our	nation	as	a	deliverance,	a
turning	point,	a	chance.	The	Russians	delighted	in
Putin,	regardless	of	what	he	may	have	been	doing.
He	was	everything	we	could	ever	dream	of:	a	self-
disciplined,	sober,	young,	serious	leader	who	took
care	of	our	country.
Putin’s	 political	 formula	 during	 his	 first
presidency	was	a	combination	of	patriotism	and
liberalism.	  This	  combination	  suited	  the
expectations	 of	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 Russians
perfectly.	 The	 patriots	 applauded	 the	 steps	 he
took	 to	 revive	 Russia	 as	 a	 superpower.
Meanwhile,	 the	 liberals	 (at	 least	 the	 moderate
ones)	 were	 satisfied	 with	 the	 fact	 that	 the
majority	 of	 ‘their	 own	 men’	 remained	 in	 the
government’s	 economic	 sector,	 upholding	 a
mostly	pro-Western	style	of	foreign	policy.	The
Duma	elections	went	smoothly,	and	Putin	won	the
presidential	 elections	 by	 a	 landslide.	 Putin’s

inauguration	on	7	May	2004	was	the	apogee	of
the	 ‘white	 zone’	 of	 Putin’s	 rule.	 But	 then
history’s	plans	were	disrupted	and	took	a	wrong
turn.	Something	went	wrong.
The	assassination	of	Kadyrov	—	symbolically,
on	9	May
[161]
	—	was	an	absolute	disaster.	Shortly
before	 the	 event,	 if	 media	 sources	 were	 to	 be
trusted,	the	opponents	of	the	new	regime	‘were
almost	 gone’,	 and	 the	 guerrilla	 forces	 had
surrendered	en	masse.	According	to	the	victor’s
reports,	 everything	 in	 Chechnya	 was	 going
smoothly.	 And	 suddenly,	 like	 thunder	 rolling
across	the	sky,	Akhmad	Kadyrov	was	no	more.
Since	bad	news	has	a	tendency	to	come	in	threes,
these	‘non-existent’,	‘eliminated’	and	‘decisively
defeated’	guerrilla	forces	started	an	 uprising	 in
Ingushetia	 on	 22	 June,	 attacking	 federal
institutions.	    Simultaneously,	    Mikhail
Saakashvili,
[162]
	 who	 was	 hell-bent	 on	 removing
Russia’s	 principal	 trump	 cards	 in	 the	 South

Caucasus,	 began	 his	 bloody	 Caucasian	 spree	 in
Georgia.
[163]
	This	was	followed	by	the	challenge
of	 Aslan	 Abashidze,
[164]
	 which	 was	 completely
inexplicable	in	light	of	Putin’s	courageous	policy.
In	 July,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 during	 Saakashvili’s
presidency,	a	dark	cloud	of	uncertainty	hung	over
South	Ossetia’s	and	Abkhazia’s
[165]
	future.
At	the	same	time,	the	monetisation	of	social
benefits	 was	 not	 well-received	 by	 Russian
society:	the	initiative	could	not	even	have	been
saved	 by	 Kremlin	 spin	 doctors	 orchestrating
processions	of	homeless	people	holding	banners
saying	 ‘Deprive	 us	 of	 benefits!	 We	 don’t	 want
them!’	 Although	 control	 over	 electronic	 media
sources	and	a	tamed	Duma	prevented	the	reaction
to	 this	 series	 of	 unfortunate	 events	to	 be
expressed	politically	(unfunny	comedians	tried	to
offset	the	cries	of	the	people	on	TV	programmes,
and	outrage	in	the	Duma	was	quickly	suppressed
by	 United	 Russia),	 it	 all	 led	 to	 an	 unfortunate

outcome:	the	 ‘white	 zone’	 of	 Putin’s	 rule	 was
over.	We	stood	on	the	threshold	of	a	‘grey	zone’.
The	 ‘grey	 zone’	 meant	 that	 the	 same	 political
moves,	formulas,	tricks	and	manoeuvres	that	had
previously	 yielded	 positive	 results	 would	 from
then	on	be	perceived	differently.	The	‘grey	zone’
is	 the	 first	 step	 toward	 the	 erosion	 of	 our
expectations,	the	first	twilight	of	disappointment,
and	the	beginning	of	dissatisfaction,	apathy,	and
exhaustion.	These	very	dangerous	symptoms	had
a	 significant	 influence	 on	 the	 overall	 style	 of
Putin’s	 second	 term.	 They	 also	 constitute	 the
challenges	and	risks	of	the	new	third	term.	We
will	now	analyse	the	signs	that	we	were	entering
the	‘grey	zone’	in	detail.
First,	let’s	analyse	the	element	of	contrast.	The
fact	that	Yeltsin	(not	to	mention	Gorbachev)	was
slipping	from	memory	had	previously	worked	in
Putin’s	favour,	but	was	now	working	against	him.
All	 of	 Putin’s	 strong	 points	 —	 his	 age,	 sober

attitude,	 toughness,	 pragmatism,	 and	 so	 on,
looked	especially	appealing	in	contrast	with	his
predecessors.	During	his	second	term,	however,
critics	were	comparing	Putin	to	Putin	himself	(or
to	 his	 own,	 still	 inarticulated,	 political
programme).		The	contrast	factor	wore	off,	and
the	 bar	 for	 warding	 off	 complaints,	 questions,
quandaries,	and	critique	had	been	raised.	Whereas
it	had	previously	been	sufficient	to	say	‘Putin!’
and	have	everyone	understand	that	it	meant	‘non-
Yeltsin’,	 entering	 the	 ‘grey	 zone’	 meant	 that
public	 reaction	 had	 shifted:	 ‘Putin?	 What	 has
Putin	done,	what	is	he	doing	now	and	what	is	he
going	 to	 do	 next?’	 At	 this	 point	 we,	 as	 his
supporters,	had	to	retreat	and	really	think	about	it.
Second:	the	team.	The	Putin	of	the	earlier	era
had	 pushed	 the	 hateful	 oligarchs	 aside,	 taking
power	 away	 from	 ‘the	 Family’	 and	 introducing
the	humble	and	invisible	‘Peter	Guys’	from	his
team	into	the	Russian	government.	These	changes

were	 met	 with	 applause	via	 contradiction:	a
reaction	 propelled	 largely	 by	 ‘contrast	 logic’.
Putin	moved	cautiously	but	consistently.	The	very
act	 of	 removing	 some	 of	 the	 most	 notorious
Yeltsin-era	figures	had	been	sufficient	during	the
‘white	 period’.	 But	 after	 the	 tipping	 point	 —
Putin’s	 inauguration	 —	 it	 suddenly	 became
evident	that	a	contrast	play	would	not	be	enough.
A	huge	segment	of	spin	doctors	from	‘the	Family’
had	retained	their	positions	of	power,	maintaining
their	 pro-American,	 Russophobe	 outlook;	 the
majority	of	the	oligarchs	were	still	around;	the
quiet	 Peter	 Guys	 proved	 to	 be	 politically	 weak
aside	 from	 the	 occasional	 interjection	 into
internal	 quarrels	 and	 behind-the-curtain	 battles
for	 the	 division	 of	 influence	 over	 finances.	 No
significant	 political	 rotation	 took	 place,	 a	 solid
team	 was	 never	 formed,	 and	 political
development	came	to	a	halt.
Third:	Chechnya.	After	the	death	of	Kadyrov,

it	 turned	 out	 that	 the	 decision	 to	 reign	 in
Chechnya	by	force	had	not	been	followed	up	with
any	 significant	 political	 measures.	 There	 were
only	 ‘virtual’	 policies,	 which	 proved	 to	 be
extremely	fragile.	The	way	the	triumvirate	—	the
confused	metropolitan	youth	Sergei	Abramov,
[166]
the	awkward	Kadyrov	Jr.,
[167]
	and	the	old	hand	Alu
Alkhanov
[168]
	 —	 appeared	 to	 the	 public	 sent	 a
strong	 message:	 something	 was	 wrong	 with
Chechnya.	 It’s	 a	 sore	 subject,	 but	 the	 overt
displacement	of	a	concrete	political	decision	by	a
PR	 surrogate	 made	 the	 ‘grey	 zone’	 even	 more
grey.
Fourth:	Georgia.	Saakashvili	did	not	come	to
power	 out	 of	 the	 blue.	 He	 was	 coached	 and
brought	 to	 power	 from	 overseas	 to	 fulfil	 a
mission:	to	drive	Russia	away	from	the	Caucasus
either	peacefully	or	by	military	means.	The	Rose
Revolution
[169]
	was	presented	as	an	ultimatum	to

Russia.	 We	 did	 not	 take	 any	 practical	 steps	 to
affect	 an	 alternative	 scenario	 that	 would	 have
been	more	suitable	for	us.	The	expulsion	of	Aslan
Abashidze	was	unacceptable.	It	was	a	flashback	to
the	 Gorbachev	 and	 Yeltsin	 era,	 when	 Moscow
betrayed	our	friends	and	allies,	surrendering	our
geopolitical	 positions	 without	 a	 fight.	 The
beginning	of	a	fully-fledged	war	in	the	form	of
constant	conflicts	in	this	region	in	August	2004
was	 the	 logical	 extension	 of	 our	 fundamental
errors.	This	problem,	quite	obviously,	would	not
be	easily	remedied.
An	 important	 point	 is	 the	 priorities	 of	 our
foreign	policy.	Russia	did	not	get	a	chance	to	sort
them	out	during	Putin’s	first	term.	We	did	not
ultimately	 choose	 which	 Western	 power	 we
wanted	to	support:	was	Russia	with	the	US	or	the
European	Union?	Which	forces	in	the	US	should
we	support:	the	Republicans	(imperialists)	or	the
Democrats	 (globalists)?	 Did	 we	 even	 have	 any

partners	in	the	US	at	all?	There	was	also	no	clear
solution	as	to	how	to	handle	relations	with	Asian
countries.	 We	 made	 some	 advances,	 but	 then
strayed	in	the	pro-American	direction	again.	The
initiative	to	combat	‘international	terrorism’	also
ended	 in	 failure,	 along	 with	 the	 American
occupation	 of	 Iraq	 and	 the	 start	 of	 military
assaults	  against	  the	  civilian	  population
(especially	in	southern	Iraq),	which	had	nothing
to	do	with	either	Al	Qaeda	or	Saddam	Hussein.
After	Yeltsin’s	squeamish	attitude	toward	the
CIS	states,	everyone	expected	a	faster	integration
of	 the	 post-Soviet	 space	 from	 Putin.	 Initially,
these	 expectations	 seemed	 to	 be	 justified:	 the
initiatives	 of	 Nursultan	 Nazarbayev
[170]
	 were
finally	supported	by	the	Kremlin,	 the	 EurAsEC
was	created,	followed	by	the	Collective	Security
Treaty	 Organisation,	 and	 the	 creation	 of	 the
Union	 State	 of	 Russia	 and	 Belarus.
[171]
	 But	 the
process	 gradually	 came	 to	 a	 halt	 as	 actual

measures	 were	 replaced	 by	 declarations,	 and
tedious	details	and	private	differences	weakened
the	push	toward	integration.	And	yet	again,	via
‘contrast	logic’,	everything	seemed	to	be	going	a
lot	better	than	before	Putin.
Vladimir	Putin’s	main	achievements	were	in
the	field	of	mass	media.	He	put	an	end	to	anti-
state	broadcasting,	which	gave	rise	to	patriotism
and	the	revival	of	national	traditions	and	covered
up	the	crude	reality	of	the	oligarch	wars.	Respect
for	the	state	and	government	policy	was	generally
restored,	 and	 the	 compliance	 of	 the	 media	 was
evident.	During	Putin’s	‘white	zone’	presidency,
watching	 TV	 was	 an	 absolute	 pleasure.	 But
gradually	we	forgot	how	it	had	been	before	Putin
came	to	power:	good	things	are	easy	to	get	used
to,	 and	 public	 attention	 shifted	 to	 other	 things.
Television	 became	 overrun	 by	 completely
mindless	channels	which	were	overtly	biased	and
had	a	strictly	managed	model	of	political	process

coverage	 (which	 led	 to	 its	 utter	 emaciation).
Programming	 was	 marked	 by	 a	 deliberate
disregard	 for	 important	 and	 serious	 social,
historical	 and	 cultural	 topics.	 The	 focus	 on
spectacles,	 unbridled	 voyeurism,	 vulgarity,
shamelessness	 and	 cynicism	 in	 contemporary
Russian	media	is	objectionable	beyond	criticism.
And	since	these	media	sources	are	now	under	the
control	 of	 a	 ‘managed	 democracy’,	 our
complaints	about	these	developments	are	directed
toward	 the	 Russian	 authorities.	 Unfunny	 TV
humour	is	a	disturbing	feature	of	the	‘grey	zone’.
If	the	thick-lipped	wannabe	Galkin
[172]
	is	the	‘face
of	Russia’,	then	something	must	be	very	wrong
with	Russia.
In	terms	of	economic	development,	Putin	had
noticeably	relieved	social	tension	by	challenging
the	oligarchs.	In	light	of	his	policies	toward	them,
the	fact	that	the	national	government	was	overrun
by	 liberal	 economists	 appeared	 to	 be	 one	 of

Putin’s	 temporary	 concessions.	 But	 Gräf,
Chubais,	 Kudrin,	 Khristenko
[173]
	 and	 their
opponent	 Illarionov	 continued	 to	 press	 on	 with
radical	 Gaidar-style	 shock	 therapy	 tactics	 that
even	 the	 latter-day	 Yeltsin	 tried	 to	 distance
himself	 from.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 saved	 the
Russian	  people	  from	  drastic	  Western
‘adjustments’	 to	 public	 utility	 rates,	 transport
tariffs,	and	electricity	and	fuel	prices	was	the	fact
that	oil	prices	on	the	global	market	continued	to
grow.	In	the	future,	even	competent	stabilisation
measures	 coupled	 with	 a	 favourable	 economic
environment	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 preserve	 the
current	 order	 of	 social	 spending	 and	 the
corresponding	 income	 indexation.	 The	 liberal
concept	of	monetising	social	benefits	is	only	the
first	step	toward	a	new	wave	of	liberal	reforms
and	privatisation	cycles.	Indeed,	the	‘grey	zone’
was	marked	by	a	gloomy	outlook.
The	 patriotism	 +	 liberalism	 formula	 was

initially	quite	satisfactory:	everybody	interpreted
it	in	his	own	way	and	was	generally	pleased	with
it.	 The	 liberals,	 such	 as	 Pavlovsky,	 Chubais	 or
Surkov	perceived	‘patriotism’	as	a	mere	disguise
—	a	‘façade’	created	to	relieve	social	pressure.
The	patriots	—	the	Peter	Guys	and	the	siloviki
[174]
—	prioritised	the	restoration	of	a	strong	state	and
a	 vertical	 power
[175]
	 structure	 over	 Russia’s
economic	structure,	agreeing	to	make	concessions
so	 long	 as	 Russia	 could	 regain	 its	 geopolitical
influence	 and	 independence.	 At	 some	 point,
however,	the	combination	patriotism	+	liberalism
stopped	 working:	 the	 liberals	 were	 constantly
striving	to	push	their	agenda,	attempting	to	guide
P u t i n	from	  economic	  liberalism	  towards
geopolitical	Atlanticism	 in	 order	 to	 finalise	 the
liberal	course;	the	patriots,	in	turn,	realised	the
negative	social	impact	of	liberal	reforms	in	the
economy	 and	 kept	 insisting	 on	 implementing
market	 mechanisms	 to	 meet	 the	 national	 and

social	needs	of	the	state.	After	employing	Putin’s
political	 formula	 to	 establish	 their	 initial
positions,	 both	 forces	 gradually	raised	 their
expectations.	 There	 is	 no	 more	 room	 for
compromise,	and	Putin	will	need	another	formula
in	order	to	find	a	way	out.
During	 Putin’s	 ‘white	 zone’,	 the	 issue	 of
presidential	 elections	 was	 simple:	 the	 key
challenge	was	to	frame	the	re-election	in	the	most
organic	 and	 elegant	 light	 possible,	 as	 nobody
questioned	 Putin’s	 success	 per	 se.	 Putin	 was
Putin’s	ideal	successor.	The	election	of	2008	(the
end	 of	 the	 second	 term	 constitutionally	 barred
Putin	 from	 running	 for	 President	 again)	 meant
that	the	entire	system	was	running	the	risk	of	total
collapse.	Putin’s	successor	could	not	have	been
worse	 than	 Putin,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 have	 been
better	either.	He	could	not	systematically	inherit
Putin’s	 line,	 since	 his	 most	 successful
accomplishments	were	concentrated	in	the	‘white

zone’	 and	 were	 based	 on	 its	 contrast	 with	 the
previous,	 strictly	 negative	 power	 models.	 The
‘grey	zone’	successor	did	not	have	this	advantage.
Besides,	to	continue	with	the	zones	analogy,	an
altogether	more	sinister	‘black	zone’	waited	on
the	end	of	the	‘grey	zone’,	and	it	was	inescapably
connected	 with	 the	 fatal	 date:	 2008.	 I	 have
already	listed	the	alarming	symptoms	of	the	‘grey
zone’	in	my	analysis	above.	I	am	convinced	that
once	we	had	entered	it,	there	was	no	way	back.
My	 personal	 political	 position	 is	 to	 support
Vladimir	 Putin,	 as	 before.	 I	positively	 assessed
(and	 still	 do)	 his	 overall	 presidency,	 his	 main
strategies	 and	 his	 potential.	 But	 this	 does	 not
mean	that	one	should	underestimate	or	deny	the
seriousness	of	Russia’s	current	predicament.
Unexpected	Visitors
Putin’s	2007	Munich	speech,	in	which	he	clearly
demonstrated	 that	 he	 intended	 to	 build	 and

strengthen	 Russia’s	 sovereignty,	 marked	 his
triumphant	 exit	 out	 of	 the	 ‘grey	 zone’.
Sovereignty	is	a	very	profound	notion.	On	the	one
hand,	it	is	simply	a	nominal,	legal	concept.	On	the
other	hand,	though,	it	implies	geopolitical	power.
Many	countries	have	legal	sovereignty,	but	real
geopolitical	 sovereignty	 is	 possessed	 only	 by	 a
select	few.	The	concept	of	sovereignty,	which	had
been	 thrust	 into	 the	 spotlight	 of	 the	 Russian
political	community,	is	one	of	actual	geopolitical
sovereignty.	Russia	has	always	possessed	it,	and
it	had	been	the	subject	of	discussion	during	the
entire	term	of	Putin’s	presidency.	After	Putin’s
speech	 in	 Munich,	 the	 actual	 substance	 of	 this
political	sovereignty	was	called	into	question,	and
it	  requires	  serious	  consideration	  and
reassessment.
Essentially,	 Vladimir	 Putin’s	 Munich	 speech
changed	 the	 entire	 world	 order.	 Previously
nobody	dared	to	challenge	the	hegemony	of	the

US	 as	 the	 principal	 political	 subject.	 Nobody,
apart	from	some	marginal	forces,	talked	about	the
unfairness	 of	 a	 unipolar	 world.	 In	 his	 Munich
speech,	 the	 President	 of	 a	 great	 nuclear	 power
decisively	 rejected	 the	 unipolar	 model	 of	 the
world.	 When	 uttered	 by	 the	 President	 of	 a
democratic,	powerful	country,	this	statement	was
not	 a	 simple	 declaration	 void	 of	 political
substance:	it	was	a	declaration	of	a	new	political
course.	Putin	established	a	path	to	a	multipolar
world,	which	was	a	fundamental	achievement	that
became	 the	 most	 important	 event	 in	 recent
history.	 After	 this	 speech,	 Russia	 regained	 its
status	as	a	great	world	power	that	plays	an	active
role	in	setting	the	world’s	policy	agenda.
After	this	historical	turning	point,	Putin	was
finally	able	to	gain	ground	in	terms	of	domestic
policy,	effectively	pushing	Russia’s	ultra-liberals
to	the	sidelines	of	the	political	playing	field.	The
parliamentary	 election	 results	 were	 particularly

telling	 in	 this	 regard:	 Kasyanov,	 Kasparov	 and
(Right	 Cause)	 are	 seen	 today	 as	 a	 political
embarrassment	rather	than	as	a	viable	alternative.
The	 Kremlin	 followed	 suit,	 because	 such	 anti-
sovereignty	forces	had	become	entirely	redundant
and	out-of-place	in	a	sovereign	democracy.	This
shift	might	be	cruel	to	the	people	who	were	once
in	power,	but	it	is	nonetheless	a	kind	of	salvation
and	a	necessity,	and	is	absolutely	the	right	move
for	Russia.
Patriotic	rhetoric	has	finally	come	to	dominate
the	 media,	 although	 themes	 pertaining	 to	 the
empire	 and	 the	 greatness	 of	 our	 national
achievements	 still	 exist	 side-by-side	 with
mindless	 entertainment	 that	 has	 become	 even
more	dominant.	This	can	be	considered	a	negative
trend.	 But	 all	 political	 and	 all	 meaningful
programmes	are	designed	in	terms	of	promoting
the	Russian	singularity,	highlighting	the	greatness
and	 dignity	 of	 the	 Russian	 state	 and	 Russian

history.	 This	 is	 a	 fundamental	 turning	 point,
because	in	the	1990s	such	vulgarity	as	was	being
presented	 at	 the	 time	 was	 accompanied	 by	 the
endless	Russophobic	derision	of	our	people	and
history.	 Russophobia	 is	 finally	 in	 the	 past,	 and
although	our	media	sources	remain	far	from	ideal,
they	are	fairly	patriotically	oriented,	and	this	is
certainly	a	positive	development.
In	2007,	the	sovereign	democracy	doctrine	was
finally	 formulated.	 The	 ideological	 formula	 of
sovereign	 democracy	 was	 fully	 supported	 by
Russian	 society	 because	 such	 concepts	 are
normally	 in	 high	 demand	 with	 our	 people.	 But
what	was	the	purpose	of	this?	Unfortunately,	the
authorities	failed	to	develop	this	ideological	trend
any	further	and,	although	much	was	said	about
sovereign	 democracy	 and	 Putin’s	 plan,	 these
discussions	proved	to	be	vague	and	diffuse,	and
though	 all	 very	 good	 and	 proper,	 they	 were
ultimately	never	clarified.

Medvedev’s	appointment	essentially	nullified
the	 expectations	 of	 the	 supporters	 of	 Russia’s
geopolitical	revival.	Yes,	there	was	the	lingering
hope	that	it	would	all	turn	out	to	be	an	astounding
special	operation	by	Putin	to	preserve	continuity.
Unfortunately,	preserving	political	continuity	in
Russia	 has	 always	 been	 a	 problem.	 The	 logic
behind	 Russia’s	 structure	 of	 political	 elites
mechanically	 followed	 the	 example	 set	 by	 the
political	agenda	of	the	1990s,	when	this	structure
swarmed	 with	 notorious	 crooks,	 scoundrels,
corruptors	and	Western	agents.	This	same	group
of	people	remained	largely	intact	while	Putin	was
in	 power	 as	 a	 mere	 parody	 of	 a	 legitimate
political	structure.	This	is	why	I	was	extremely
worried	about	the	destiny	of	my	country	and	the
legacy	of	Putin’s	achievements.	After	all,	in	spite
of	steering	the	country’s	course	away	from	the
rampant	liberalism	of	the	1990s,	Putin	retained	a
fairly	liberal	stance	in	terms	of	the	economy.	His

liberalism	was	largely	patriotic,	but	Putin	had	not
completely	parted	with	liberal	dogmatism.	So	far
as	 making	 the	 choice	 between	 Atlanticism	 or
Eurasianism	in	the	geopolitical	space,	Putin	had
clearly	  and	  unambiguously	  opted	  for
Eurasianism.	His	stance	was	clear:	Russia’s	only
choice	is	to	be	a	great	country,	Russia	respects
herself	and	her	dignity,	Russia	is	integrating	the
post-Soviet	 space.	 Sovereignty	 was	 the	 primary
national	 focus	 that	 would	 become	 the	 driving
force	behind	Russia’s	political	value	system.	But,
in	 spite	 of	 all	 these	 positive	 developments,
Putin’s	departure	in	2008	seemed	to	be	the	end	of
the	‘golden	age’	of	his	rule.	A	new	era	had	begun:
the	era	of	Medvedev.
Putin	is	unquestionably	the	chief	protagonist
of	Russian	politics,	as	well	as	a	worldwide	leader:
a	fact	that	has	been	rightfully	recognised	by	Time
magazine.
[176]
	 Putin	 is	 the	 man	 who	 revived
Russia,	infusing	her	with	power	and	might.	Putin

should	 have	 ended	 his	 triumphant	 rule	 with	 a
third	term,	and	then	Russia’s	‘golden	age’	would
have	continued	on,	uninterrupted.	Unfortunately,
this	was	not	the	case.	At	the	peak	of	his	power,	in
spite	of	being	the	sole	and	absolute	sovereign	and
autocratic	 subject	 in	 Russia’s	 political	 reality,
Putin	allowed	himself	the	extravagant	gesture	of
obeying	 the	 Constitution	 that	 had	 been
illegitimately	adopted	in	the	’90s.	The	disruption
served	 as	 a	 test	 for	 Putin	 and	 for	 the	 entire
country,	and	I	never	understood	this	gesture.
No	Time	to	Relax:	New	Network
Challenges
With	 four	 dangerous	 years	 of	 Medvedev’s
presidency	 finally	 behind	 us,	 it	 seems	 that
nothing	is	threatening	Vladimir	Putin	any	longer.
His	ratings	are	fairly	high,	and	United	Russia’s
performance	 does	 not	 matter	 anymore.	 This
shouldn’t	 come	 as	 a	 surprise.	 The	 notion	 of

‘Putin’	in	people’s	minds	is	associated	with	the
aspiration	 to	 establish	 Russia’s	 sovereignty,
which,	 as	 history	 tells	 us,	 has	 always	 been	 a
priority	for	the	Russian	people.	It	is	clear	now:
Putin	 is	 not	 ‘sovereign	 democracy’.	 Putin	 is
simply	 ‘sovereignty’,	 and	 the	 concept	 of
democracy	 is	 just	 a	 product	 thrown	 in	 for
appearances.	 Putin	 may	 indeed	 believe	 in
democracy,	but	this	is	irrelevant	because	a	lot	of
people	sincerely	believe	in	democracy,	 but	 this
belief	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 become	 Putin.	 In	 most
cases,	 sincere	 supporters	 of	 democracy	 evolve
into	something	quite	the	opposite	of	Putin,	into
‘orange	 revolutionaries’,
[177]
	 the	 enemies	 of
Russia	and	the	Russian	people.	As	for	Putin,	he	is
the	embodiment	of	Russian	sovereignty.	This	is
what	 ‘Putin’	 is	 all	 about.	 All	 other	 aspects	 of
Putin	 that	 are	 not	 related	 to	 sovereignty	 are
subsidiary	and	insignificant.	The	point	of	Putin’s
actions	 is	 to	 strengthen	 and	 defend	 Russia’s

sovereignty	in	the	face	of	globalisation.	This	is
also	precisely	the	point	of	continuity.
So,	 what	 threats	 is	 Putin’s	 search	 for
sovereignty	 facing,	 and	 who	 is	 the	 ‘enemy’	 of
Putin’s	plan?
The	 principal	 enemy	 is	 not	 internal,	 but
external.	The	United	States	of	America	is	quickly
changing	its	manner	and	methods	of	interaction
with	 other	 states	 and	 polishing	 the	 so-called
‘network	 wars’	 technology.	 Network	 wars	 are
wars	 conducted	 mostly	 in	 the	 sphere	 of
information.	 These	 wars	 are	 based	 on	 the
resonance	 effect,	 meaning	 that	 various	 and
otherwise	 unrelated	 ideological,	 social,	 civil,
economic,	ethnological	and	migratory	processes
are	manipulated	by	external	agents	to	achieve	a
specific	 final	 purpose.	 The	 main	 goal	 of	 a
network	 war	 is	 to	 strip	 opponents	 of	 their
sovereignty.	This	is	the	basis	of	the	new	model	of
relations	between	all	countries,	primarily	Russia

and	the	US,	and	it	cannot	be	reduced	to	a	simple
logic.	 Concepts	 like	 ‘friends	 vs	 enemies’,
‘competition	vs	partnership’,	and	‘confrontation
vs	 cooperation’	 are	 no	 longer	 applicable.	 The
logic	of	‘network	wars’	is	of	an	entirely	different
breed.	 Currently,	 the	 authorities	 (and	 Putin	 in
particular)	are	helpless	in	the	face	of	the	network
challenges	 coming	 from	 the	 US.	 They	 are	 not
prepared	to	adequately	react	to	them	due	to	stark
differences	 in	 historical	 traditions,	 and	 also
because	they	are	overwhelmed	by	 an	 enormous
amount	of	technical	and	economic	problems.	But
it	is	the	global	‘network	war’	that	is	the	driving
force	 of	 international	 politics,	 and	 neither
Vladimir	Putin	nor	our	authorities	in	general	are
adequately	prepared	to	realise	the	severity	of	this
new	problem.	Our	men	are	of	a	different	breed
altogether,	 and	 the	 ‘network’,	 along	 with	 the
postmodern	values	that	spawned	it,	is	a	dangerous
blind	spot	that	poses	the	biggest	threat	to	Russia’s

sovereignty	and	to	Putin	personally.
The	Chaord	and	Its	Strategies
The	contemporary	US	is	a	unique	type	of	empire.
It	is	a	thalassocracy:	a	maritime,	decentralised,
polycentric	 and	 eccentric	 empire.	 The	 post-
Marxist	American	philosophers	Negri	and	Hardt
talk	about	this	phenomenon	extensively	in	their
book	Empire.
[178]
	 An	 empire	 has	 always	 been
perceived	 as	 a	 logical,	 regulating,	 intelligible
entity,	and	the	concept	of	an	‘empire’	has	always
implied	 order	 over	 chaos.	 But	 in	 the
contemporary	  world,	  empires	  acquire	  a
paradoxical	 character	 that	 mimics	 order,	 and
contemporary	empires	tend	to	breed	chaos	instead
of	 reining	 it	 in.	 There	 have	 been	 two	 types	 of
empires	throughout	the	course	of	history:	land-
based	and	sea-based.	As	opposed	 to	 centralised
land-based	 empires	 like	 the	 Roman	 or	 the
Eurasian	 empires,	 which	 favour	 vertical	 power

structures,	 the	 American	 thalassocratic	 (sea-
based)	 empire	 is	 horizontal,	 network-based,
rhizomatic,
[179]
	 tuberous:	 the	 empire’s	 centre	 is
simultaneously	everywhere	and	nowhere.	In	this
kind	of	empire,	order	is	fused	with	chaos,	creating
what	 Negri	 and	 Hardt	 called	 ‘chaord’	 —	 a
synthesis	of	chaos	and	order.
The	 main	 thesis,	 argument,	 political	 goal,
means	 and	 weapon	 of	 America	 in	 the
contemporary	 world	 is	 democracy	 as	 a	 self-
sustaining	 virus.	 In	 the	 global	 world,	 the
promotion	of	democracy	is	an	effective	method	of
extending	 US	 influence.	 The	 Western	 world	 is
based	 on	 the	 principle	 of	 developed	 individual
initiative.	When	Western	democracy	is	projected
on	 societies	 marked	 by	 a	 tradition	 of
individualism,	 it	 creates	 a	 system	 in	 which
democracy	propels	social	development.	It	worked
with	the	projection	of	democratic	principles	onto
Japanese	 society,	 because	 the	 concept	 of

individualism	 is	 extremely	 developed	 in	 Japan.
But	if	democracy	is	imported	into	societies	with
weak	individualistic	principles	—	societies	of	a
holistic	type	—	it	destroys	whole	ensembles	and
creates	 chaos.	 Democracy	 in	 such	 a	 system
performs	a	creative	and	a	genocidal	function	at
the	 same	 time.	 The	 formula	 of	 order
simultaneously	opposes	and	provokes	chaos.	The
contemporary	American	empire	actively	employs
the	chaos	strategy,	transferring	this	discourse	into
a	space	of	non-linear	processes,	giving	new	nature
and	 proportions	 to	 international	 relations,
creating	 paradoxical	 paradigms	 of	 decision-
making,	 and	 constructing	 a	 new	 geometry	 of
power,	 projects,	 planning,	 and	 confrontation.
Russia	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 confront	 globalism
through	obsolete	anti-globalism	or	an	alternative
globalism	 without	 employing	 the	 laws	 of	 the
network	and	the	radically	new	proportions	of	this
dynamic,	eccentric	chaos	strategy.

The	Objective	and	Subjective	in
Putin’s	Course
After	examining	some	of	the	challenges	Vladimir
Putin	has	to	tackle,	it	is	important	to	consider	the
outline	of	the	new	course	that	he	has	set	out	to
implement.	The	global	geopolitical	processes,	the
subjective	 state	 of	 Russian	 society	 and	 its
psychological	reactions	to	the	events	of	the	1990s
all	led	to	the	inevitable	replacement	of	the	Yeltsin
power	 model	 by	 an	 alternative.	 Otherwise,	 the
new	external	administrative	force	and	the	creation
of	a	vacuum	in	the	balance	of	power	would	have
ensured	 Russia’s	 demise.	 During	 Yeltsin’s
presidency,	 Russia	 was	 beginning	 to	 withdraw
from	the	global	arena,	and	the	global	environment
was	rapidly	changing.	Russian	citizens,	of	course,
intuitively	sensed	the	catastrophic	nature	of	these
changes,	 which	 meant	 that	 Yeltsin’s	 legacy,
represented	 by	 political	 figures	 like	 Gaidar,

Chernomyrdin,
[180]
	   Nemtsov,	   Satarov,
[181]
Yumashev,	Yavlinsky,	SPS	and	Yabloko,		didn’t
stand	a	chance.
Russia’s	 new	 political	 course	 was	 closely
intertwined	with	Vladimir	Putin’s	personality.	At
the	 time	 Russia	 had	 two	 alternatives:	 it	 could
simply	cease	to	exist	as	we	know	it,	or	be	revived
by	a	series	of	reforms	proposed	by	 Putin.	 In	 a
sense,	Putin	had	no	choice	but	to	implement	these
reforms:	 if	 he	 did	 not	 want	 the	 country	 to
disintegrate,	he	had	to	do	it.	As	a	competent	and
dependable	man,	he	began	to	implement	the	only
viable	political	programme	that	was	available	to
him.	 Putin’s	 political	 course	 is	 an	 objective
phenomenon,	and,	being	a	cautious	and	prudent
leader,	he	simply	carried	out	an	order:	an	order
given	by	the	people,	by	Russia’s	history,	and	by
the	state	of	global	geopolitics.	Objectively,	this
was	 a	 fairly	 easy	 political	 course	 to	 choose.
Subjectively,	however,	it	was	very	difficult.	Day

after	day,	he	was	confronted	by	a	swarm	of	scum
who	did	not	want	a	Russian	revival,	who	acted	in
the	 interests	 of	 the	 American	 hyperpower	 and
who	tried	to	sabotage	this	objective	and	natural
course	of	events.
To	 Putin’s	 personal	 credit,	 he	 ignored	 the
historically	  anti-national	  political	  elites,
especially	during	the	first	term	of	his	presidency.
He	 did	 not	 listen	 to	 the	 various	 groups	 which
pushed	 him	 toward	 Western	 policies,	 towards
Russophobia,	 and	 toward	 a	 ‘civil	 society’	 that
would	essentially	mean	a	surrender	of	Russia	and
Putin’s	personal	suicide,	as	well	as	the	suicide	of
his	course	of	action,	his	country	and	his	people.
He	 did	 not	 listen	 to	 these	 elites	 and	 listened
instead	 to	 the	 voice	 of	 history,	 the	 people	 and
geopolitics.	 The	 continuity	 of	 Putin’s	 course	 is
the	 continuity	 of	 common	 sense	 and	 the
preservation	 of	 Russia	 as	 a	 nation.	 If	 we	 want
Russia	to	stay	alive,	we	must	follow	in	Putin’s

footsteps.	If	we	do	not	want	that,	we	may	think
about	 the	 alternatives.	 Putin’s	 course	 is	 an
objective	and	in	fact	the	only	possible	course,	and
we	 can	 only	 discuss	 how	 fast	 we	 should	 move
along	it.	In	the	end,	this	course	will	be	followed
on	the	strength	of	its	objective	merits.
But	this	objectivity	has	a	weak	point:	Vladimir
Putin	 did	 not	 create	 a	 new	 elite	 to	 succeed
himself;	he	did	not	create	the	prerequisites	for	a
continuity	of	his	course	of	action	in	the	subjective
consciousness	 of	 the	 political	 elite	 of
contemporary	Russia.	At	some	point	a	personal
successor	 emerged,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 collective
successor	in	the	form	of	a	new	elite.	The	political
elites	in	Russia	are	still	arbitrary,	much	like	they
were	in	the	1990s,	and	Putin	did	not	eliminate	this
arbitrariness	and	the	resulting	transient	nature	and
ephemeral	 mentality	 of	 the	 political	 and
economic	elites.	He	did	not	limit	their	lust	for
power,	 as	 well	 as	 for	 business,	 as	 he	 did	 with

corruption.	This	is	a	weak	point	in	his	personal
continuity,	 and	a	 weak	 point	 in	 the	 continuity
scheme.
Our	current	political	elites	are	marked	by	total
inadequacy	 and	 subjectivism.	 This	 includes	 the
people	brought	to	power	by	Putin,	because	they,
like	everything	in	Russia,	were	also	brought	in	at
random.	 They	 did	 not	 reverse	 the	 negative
tendencies	of	the	Yeltsin	period’s	political	elites,
but	 blended	 with	 them	 instead.	 They	 are	 better
than	the	previous	ones	only	because	they	follow
Putin’s	 orders,	 and	 Putin	 follows	 the	 orders	 of
history	 and	 of	 the	 Russian	 people,	 but
subjectively	they	are	the	same.	Subjectively,	they
have	 not	 woken	 up;	 they	 are	 unaware	 of	 the
historical	significance	of	their	mission,	and	fail	to
understand	the	geopolitical	goal,	nor	do	they	feel
any	civic	responsibility.	Putin	did	not	create	new,
adequate	 politicians;	 he	 hasn’t	 even	 started	 the
process	of	forming	this	elite	group.	Formally,	not

a	single	person	aspiring	to	play	an	important	role
in	Russia	would	argue	against	the	continuation	of
the	current	course,	but	the	subjective	inadequacy
of	the	political	elite	will	result	in	power	struggles
in	Russia	throughout	Putin’s	rule.
We	 know	 that	 the	 chances	 of	 the	 liberals
gaining	ground	are	practically	negligible,	because
everybody	 rejects	 the	 alternative	 to	 Putin’s
course:	both	the	masses	and	the	elite.	The	people
who	 dare	 challenge	 this	 course	 don’t	 stand	 a
chance.	But	in	terms	of	ensuring	the	continuity	of
Putin’s	rule,	some	catastrophic	developments	that
are	being	propelled	by	the	intellectual	inadequacy
of	Russia’s	political	elite	have	already	begun	to
take	shape.
Contrary	to	popular	expectations,	the	threat	is
not	coming	from	the	‘orange	revolutionaries’.	In
fact,	they	have	even	been	somewhat	helpful,	as
the	unpopularity	of	their	position	forces	Russia’s
competent,	 healthy	 forces	 to	 gravitate	 toward

Putin.	It	is	possible	that	the	existence	of	fringe
forces	that	are	openly	supported	by	the	West	or
the	oligarchs	(and	which	the	majority	of	Russia’s
population	 treats	 with	 suspicion)	 is	 the	 sole
reason	 behind	 some	 semblance	 of	 cohesion
among	Putin’s	elite,	but	the	subjective	state	of	the
pro-Putin	 forces	 in	 power	 forebodes	 a
catastrophe.	 The	 current	 state	 of	 affairs	 could
have	 been	 changed,	 but	 instead	 turned	 into	 a
merry	make-believe	of	disinformation	games,	and
it	will	only	get	worse.	Since	Putin	has	decided	to
retain	responsibility	for	the	country,	this	is	the
first	problem	that	he	will	have	to	resolve.
If	Spring	Comes	Tomorrow
Currently,	 politics	 is	 almost	 non-existent	 in
Russia.	 It	 is	 especially	 non-existent	 during	 the
winter	holidays	and	the	New	Year’s	break.	This	is
not	only	because	the	ruling	class	relaxes	during
this	period	between	the	Catholic	Christmas	and

the	 Old	 Style	 New	 Year,	 trying	 to	 extend	 the
holidays	 to	 the	 Eastern	 style	 New	 Year,	 but
because	 there	 is	 no	 politics	 in	 Russia	 at	 all.
Political	discourse	is	absent	because	nobody	has
any	use	for	it.	The	elite	does	not	need	it	because
having	 a	 defined	 political	 platform	 would
inevitably	restrict	government	authority	and	force
them	 to	 explain	 how	 their	 actions,	 results	 or
declarations	 match	 their	 stated	 political	 goals,
guidelines,	 and	 ideals.	 The	 absence	 of	 political
goals,	 guidelines,	 or	 ideals	 means	 that	 there	 is
nothing	 to	 explain.	 When	 there	 is	 no	 political
discourse,	 the	 authorities	 are	 completely	 free
from	responsibility.	As	long	as	they	are	tolerated,
they	can	do	anything	they	please.
The	 absence	 of	 political	 discourse	 doesn’t
seem	 to	 concern	 the	 masses	 either.	 There	 are
several	reasons	for	this.	First,	the	people	became
completely	disillusioned	with	politics	during	the
1990s.	 They	 grew	 tired	 of	 the	 scandalous

alcoholic	loon	Yeltsin,	his	stupid	daughter	and	the
‘Family’,	 the	 mighty	 scheming	 oligarchs,	 the
obscure	media	assassins	dropping	subtle	hints,	the
whining	of	populist	politicians,	and	meetings	that
always	seemed	to	be	directed	‘against’	something
(nobody	could	figure	out	what).	The	absence	of
politics	 and	 a	 political	 discourse	 meant	 the
absence	of	neurosis.
Secondly,	the	people	were	enjoying	their	lives
during	Putin’s	presidency.	They	enjoyed	the	fact
that	 Putin	 provided	 a	 mix	 of	 sternness	 and
tolerance.	They	liked	Putin’s	alpha	policies	and
the	partially	demoted	liberals	in	the	government.
They	 relished	 in	 the	 balance	 between	 a	 strong,
fatherly	care	and	a	soothing	democratic	discourse.
Everyone	could	pick	what	he	liked	best.	Putin’s
discourse	was	like	therapy,	a	Buddhist	kōan	that
contained	 irreconcilable	 oppositions	 but	 spared
listeners	from	making	intellectual	efforts.
Third,	the	Russian	people	do	 not	 understand

politics:	 it	 confuses	 them.	 Communism	 as	 a
political	 model	 fell	 apart	 in	 the	 1990s,	 and	 its
disintegration,	 aided	 by	 Zyuganov’s	 inadequate
management	of	the	Communist	Party,	continued
during	the	2000s.	Liberalism	didn’t	sit	well	with
Russians	either.	Nationalism	frightens	us	with	its
ecstatic	 energy.	 Given	 these	 three	 inadequate
options,	 a	 serious	 effort	 would	 be	 required	 in
order	to	become	interested	in	politics.	Even	the
ready-made	political	recipes	are	not	very	easy	to
understand,	let	alone	creative	thinking	in	terms	of
political	theory	(beyond	liberalism,	Communism
and	fascism).	Spare	us,	please.	Maybe	some	other
time.
This	dynamic	is	how	the	authorities	and	the
people	arrived	at	the	‘forget	politics’	consensus.
This	is	how	the	structure	of	the	current	state	of
apoliteia
[182]
	 was	 constructed.	 Its	 symbol	 is	 the
ruling	 party	 of	 the	 ‘party-less	 majority’	 that
avoids	 political	 discussions	 (and	 for	 a	 good

reason,	 if	 you	 ask	 me).	 In	 a	 sense,	 this	 is
democracy	at	work:	if	the	majority	doesn’t	want
to	deal	with	politics,	then	it	shouldn’t	have	to	deal
with	politics.	The	question	is,	how	long	will	this
dolce	vita
[183]
	last?	For	how	long	will	we	be	able
to	forget	about	politics?	When	will	this	vacation
come	to	an	end?
The	Strategy	of	Medvedev’s	Prospective
Party:	The	Network
What	 is	 a	 possible	 scenario	 for	 the	 return	 of
politics?	This	is	difficult	to	predict.	Putin	has	an
undeniable	advantage	when	it	comes	to	the	2018
elections,	 but	 his	 victory	 is	 not	 guaranteed.	 If
Medvedev	plays	his	cards	right,	he	might	stand	a
chance.	 Intellectual	 superiority	 (liberal	 PR
specialists	 and	 spin	 doctors)	 and	 international
support	 (which	 means	 American	 PR-specialists
and	spin	doctors	too)	will	be	on	his	side.	In	order
to	respond,	Putin	will	have	to	add	more	substance

to	his	‘party’	(which	has	yet	to	be	created,	and
will	 possibly	 be	 based	 on	 the	 All-Russian
People’s	Front)	and	to	himself.	And	this	begs	the
following	 question:	 will	 he	 figure	 out	 whose
support	to	seek	in	2018,	and	does	he	have	such	a
support	 system	 (he	 was	 never	 especially	 kind
towards	intellectuals)?	Will	he	choose	the	easiest
route,	 bribing	 the	 competitor’s	 staff	 and	 using
force	or	subversive	methods?	Will	he	attempt	to
suppress	political	discourse	altogether	instead	of
outlining	 an	 alternative	 to	 Medvedev’s	 policies
(which	will	require	a	political	formulation	of	the
consensus	which	already	exists	between	Putin	and
the	people	de	facto,	but	not	ideologically)?	These
questions	have	yet	to	be	answered.
I	 want	 to	 say	 a	 few	 words	 about	 the
international	context.	Imagine	how	impatient	the
West	(primarily	the	US)	must	feel	with	respect	to
the	return	of	‘politics’	to	Russia.	This	is	a	great
opportunity	for	Washington,	and	the	Americans

will	 undoubtedly	 activate	 all	 of	 their	 agents	 of
influence	in	Russia	in	order	to	create	the	perfect
conditions	 to	 radicalise	 our	 nation.	 2018	 is	 the
year	 of	 the	 2008	 Orange	 Revolution,	 initially
postponed	due	to	Medvedev’s	appointment.	This
is	the	most	favourable	historical	moment	for	the
West	to	disrupt	the	emerging	process	of	Russia’s
return	 to	 international	 politics	 as	 a	 sovereign
power.	 The	 West	 will	 most	 likely	 use	 any
available	means.
First	of	all,	the	liberal	layer	within	Russia	will
be	 activated:	 the	 numerous	 Non-governmental
Organisations	 (NGOs),	 funds	 and	 radical
opposition	forces.	They	will	be	delegated	with	the
task	 to	 create	 a	 social	 atmosphere	 —	 in	 the
media,	 the	 community	 of	 experts	 and	 among
young	 people	 —	 which	 will	 be	 favourable	 to
Medvedev	and	detrimental	to	Putin.	Medvedev’s
network	will	be	activated:	not	the	nominal	pool	of
the	average	Russian	civil	servants	(the	President’s

thousand)
[184]
	but	the	invisible	network	developed
outside	 of	 Russia.	 In	 the	 1990s	 such	 networks
were	 extremely	 effective	 in	 their	 support	 of
Yeltsin	 and	 the	 young	 reformers.	 Then	 a	 new
upsurge	of	destabilisation	in	the	North	Caucasus
will	 follow.	 The	 disruptions	 happening	 in	 that
region	 now	 are	 only	 child’s	 play.	 Ingushetia,
Dagestan,	Kabardino-Balkaria	and	at	some	point
Chechnya	itself	will	turn	into	a	theatre	of	military
operations.	 Here	 the	 networks	 operated	 from
outside	 Russia	 will	 carefully	 play	 up	 to
Medvedev.	Finally,	on	the	diplomatic	level,	the
West	will	express	strong	support	for	Medvedev
the	Prime	Minister	and	will	defend	him	fiercely
and	in	unison,	using	measures	demonstrating	the
alleged	successes	and	great	results	of	his	policies
(as	opposed	to	Putin’s).		
The	Strategy	of	Putin’s	Party:	Ideology
What	is	the	ultimate	strategy	for	Putin	in	such	a

situation?	 Politicisation	 will	 prompt	 him	 to	 do
what	he	had	always	postponed	‘for	later’	and	what
he	wanted	to	avoid	in	the	future:	to	elaborate	a
comprehensive	 development	 strategy	 for	 Russia
and	to	create	his	own	political	programme.	The
desires	of	the	masses	and	history	with	respect	to
the	 content	 of	 this	 strategy	 are	 obvious.	 The
people	expect	order	and	centralisation	from	Putin:
strong	 ‘fatherly’	 (paternalistic)	 rule,	 full
reestablishment	  of	  Russia’s	  international
position,	protection	of	Russia’s	sovereignty,	and	a
return	 to	 patriotic	 imperialism.	 All	 of	 these
elements	are	already	in	place,	but	are	not	clearly
defined,	 nor	 implemented	 in	 a	 consistent
programme.	Now	is	the	time	to	do	it.	
But	there	is	one	thing	that	everyone	had	been
expecting	from	Putin:	a	full-scale	persecution	of
the	oligarchs.	The	exile	of	Gusinsky,	Berezovsky,
Nevzlin,
[185]
	and	so	forth	was	a	priceless	gift	for
the	people.	The	imprisonment	of	Khodorkovsky

and	Lebedev
[186]
	was	even	better.	But	those	were
isolated	actions	and	the	people	need	a	programme
for	the	eradication	of	oligarchy	as	a	political	and
economic	phenomenon.	It	should	be	declarative,
exemplary	and	systemic.	Until	all	‘iconic’	figures
(from	Abramovich	to	Deripaska)
[187]
	go	to	jail	or
go	away,	the	people’s	happiness	will	be	tarnished
by	doubt.	Besides,	the	imprisonment	itself	is	not
as	important	as	Putin’s	heartfelt	criticism	of	the
oligarchy:	simple	and	clear	human	words.	They
will	 mean	 more	 than	 the	 imprisonment.	 The
Russians	 are	 not	 bloodthirsty:	 we	 simply	 love
righteous,	morally	sane	speech.
Finally,	 Putin	 will	 have	 to	 clearly	 outline
Russia’s	 future	 plans.	 He	 must	 reinforce	 his
Munich	speech	with	further	commentary:	explain
what	the	multipolar	world	means	and	why	Russia
needs	it,	explain	the	perils	of	the	liberal	‘end	of
history’,	outline	the	prospects	for	the	revival	of
the	 Russian	 economy,	 and	 draft	 the	 ideal

boundaries	of	our	influence	in	the	world.	He	must
reinforce	the	conservative	values	that	are	deeply
rooted	 in	 Russian	 culture	 (family,	 morals,
communalism,	 sacrifice,	 the	 awareness	 of	 a
universal	 mission).	 He	 will	 have	 to	 describe	 a
future	that	is	dear	to	him	personally.
The	continuing	influence	of	Putin	on	the	civil
servants,	 the	siloviki,	 and	 those	 who	 came	 to
Moscow	from	Saint	Petersburg	with	him	is	a	very
important	 factor.	 But	 these	 people	 cannot
immediately	 be	 transformed	 into	 politics.	 The
civil	servants	and	the	siloviki	are	depoliticised	to
an	 even	 greater	 degree	 than	 the	 masses.	 They
have	 something	 to	 lose	 and,	 therefore,	 the
majority	of	them	are	bound	to	join	the	winning
side	in	the	case	of	a	real	fight.	As	people,	they	are
mostly	 garbage	 not	 worthy	 of	 our	 high	 hopes.
Before	securing	their	support,	one	must	politicise
them.	And	in	order	to	politicise	the	supporters,
one	must	have	politics.

In	 order	 to	 win	 the	 2018	 election,	 Putin,
against	his	own	will	and,	to	an	extent,	against	the
state	of	the	masses,	will	have	to	enter	politics	and
liquidate	(or	suspend	for	a	time)	depolitisation,
the	 oh-so-convenient-and-pleasing	 state	 of
apoliteia.	If	the	circumstances	prompt	Putin	to	do
it,	he	will,	among	other	things,	have	to	finalise
the	 development	 of	 a	substantial	 political	 and
ideological	project.	This	would	be	just	great	if	the
threat	were	not	so	serious:	if	politics	returns	to
Russia,	it	will	bring	all	of	its	inherent	risks	along
for	the	ride.	At	this	point,	the	inconclusive	nature
of	 all	 of	 Putin’s	 previous	 reforms	 may	 have	 a
very	  negative	  impact:	  separatism	  will
undoubtedly	 resurface,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 residual
fifth	column	(a	mediator	of	external	influence),
the	 cynicism	 of	 the	 oligarchs,	 our	 crumbling
industry,	the	unsolved	social	problems,	 and	 the
extremely	 inadequate	 moral	 education	 of	 the
younger	generation.	In	short,	we	can,	in	fact,	slide

back	into	the	1990s.					

4.	Putin’s	Geopolitics
Shift	in	Foreign	Policy
Vladimir	 Putin’s	 presidency	 was	 marked	 by
drastic	changes	not	only	in	the	domestic	policy
structure,	 but	 also	 in	 Russia’s	 foreign	 policy
course	 in	 the	 early	 2000s.	 The	 new	 Eurasian
politics	 course	 began	 with	 Putin’s	 visits	 to
countries	in	the	Far	East.	The	fact	that	Russian
politics	 gravitated	 toward	 the	 East	 became	 a
logical	 and	 very	 reasonable	 extension	 of	 the
government’s	awareness	of	Russian	geopolitical
challenges	 in	 terms	 of	 their	 new	 historical
context.	The	key	dilemma	in	world	politics	had
been	outlined:	will	we	live	in	a	unipolar	world
that	caters	to	the	US	as	its	only	historical	subject,
or	 will	 it	 be	 possible	 to	 establish	 a	 multipolar
world?	 Neither	 Russia	 nor	 any	 other	 large
regional	power	is	able	to	singlehandedly	counter-

balance	 the	 geopolitical	 power	 of	 the	 US.
Russia’s	 only	 chance	 to	 remain	 a	 subject	 of
history	is	to	build	a	long-term	strategic	alliance
with	 great	 Eurasian	 powers	 that	 have	 strong
demographic,	 economic,	 military	 and	 cultural
potential.	The	new	President’s	tour	was	devoted
precisely	to	the	implementation	of	this	Eurasian
foreign	 policy	 course,	 which	 was	 gradually
becoming	 the	 fundamental	 idea	 behind	 Russian
politics.	 Putin	 proposed	 and	 implemented	 bold
geopolitical	initiatives,	such	as	the	revitalisation
of	relations	between	Berlin	and	Moscow,	Moscow
and	 Tehran,	 Moscow	 and	 Delhi,	 Moscow	 and
Beijing,	 and	 Moscow	 and	 Tokyo	 (though	 they
were	 not	 all	 equally	 important).	 All	 of	 these
initiatives	 are	 part	 of	 the	 Eurasian	 geopolitical
strategy	—	the	only	strategy	suitable	for	Russia
—	and	we	are	ready	to	do	our	best	to	support	and
help	Putin	throughout	the	course	of	his	mission.
In	the	process	of	establishing	close	links	with

Asian	 countries,	 Russia	 acquired	 long-term
partners	in	economic	and	strategic	development,
constructing	the	basic	framework	for	a	multipolar
world	and	reminding	the	West	that	its	aspirations
to	 international	 hegemony	 are	 invalid	 and	 suit
neither	Russia	nor	a	large	number	of	the	leading
world	powers.	The	substantive	part	of	Vladimir
Putin’s	 Asian	 tour	 in	 the	 early	 2000s	 and	 an
analysis	of	the	declarations	and	assessments	made
by	the	various	regional	media	sources	indicated
that	those	were	not	simply	routine	courtesy	visits,
but	the	beginning	of	a	new	Eurasian	course.
Territorial	Thinking
For	a	long	time,	geopolitics	was	thought	to	be	a
flawed,	 ‘bourgeois’	 science	 in	 Russia.	 Let	 me
remind	 you	 that	 this	 discipline	 frames	 world
history	as	a	confrontation	between	two	types	of
civilisations:	  sea	  civilisations	  and	  land
civilisations.	 The	 field	 of	 geopolitics	 portrays

geographical	space	as	a	kind	of	reality	—	not	only
geographical,	but	qualitative,	capable	of	affecting
the	way	a	civilisation	on	that	space	develops,	and
shaping	the	psychological	makeup	of	the	people
who	 live	 within	 a	 given	 territory.	 It	 is	 the
connection	that	culture,	tradition	and	civilisation
has	 with	 qualitative	 territory	 that	 underlies	 the
field	of	geopolitics.
This	 method	 was	 initially	 proposed	 by
Friedrich	 Ratzel,
[188]
	 the	 German	 founder	 of
political	geography	(the	precursor	of	geopolitics),
and	Rudolf	Kjellén,
[189]
	a	Swedish	scientist	who
first	 coined	 the	 term	 ‘geopolitics’.	 But	 the
foundations	of	geopolitics	were	laid	out	in	a	small
article,	‘The	Geographical	Pivot	of	History’,	by
the	 English	 scientist	 Sir	 Halford	 Mackinder.
[190]
The	 article	 introduced	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 conflict
between	civilisations	based	on	the	land	and	on	the
sea.	 Mackinder	 argues	 that	 land	 civilisations
possess	  certain	  characteristics:	  hierarchy,

authoritarianism,	 the	 prevalence	 of	 idealistic
values	 over	 mercantilism,	 and	 prioritise
collective	and	social	values	over	the	individual.
Sea	 civilisations,	 by	 contrast,	 are	 marked	 by
individualism,	 plutocracy,	 materialism	 and	 the
idea	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 boil	 different	 value
systems	 down	 to	 their	 financial	 basis.	 As
examples,	 the	 author	 cites	 Rome	 as	 a	 land
civilisation	and	Carthage	as	a	sea	civilisation,	as
well	as	England	—	the	queen	of	the	sea	—	and
her	continental	opponents	France	and	Germany.
The	 stronghold	 of	 land	 civilisations	 is	 what
geopolitical	 thinkers	 call	 the	 ‘heartland’	 or
‘middle	 land’.	 This	 is	 the	 massive	 part	 of	 the
Eurasian	 continent	 lying	 in	 its	 Northern	 and
Western	 regions,	 which	 geographically	 and
historically	overlays	the	territory	of	Russia:	the
Russian	 Empire,	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 and	 the
Russian	Federation.
This	historical	approach	leads	the	author	to	a

conclusion	 about	 the	 natural,	 predetermined
confrontation	of	these	two	types	of	civilisations,
based	not	on	an	ideology	or	on	national	interests
(which	may	differ	even	between	states	belonging
to	 the	 same	 political	 system),	 but	 on	 a
fundamental	 civilisational	 opposition	 —	 a
principle	as	basic	and	absolute	as	class	struggle
and	as	the	confrontation	of	labour	and	capital	in
Marxism.	 Geopolitics	 outlines	 the	 dialectical
struggle	of	the	land	and	the	sea,	which	influences
the	process	of	historical	development	in	countries
and	civilisations.		
As	applied	to	Russia,	geopolitical	analysis	is	a
method	 for	 identifying	 strategic	 interests	 based
on	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 natural	 and	 organic
confrontation	between	Russia	(irrespective	of	the
regime,	 whether	 democratic,	 Communist	 or
Tsarist)	and	the	Western	world	(mainly	embodied
by	the	English-speaking	countries	such	as	the	US
and	 its	 principal	 European	 ally,	 Great	 Britain).

Therefore,	the	application	of	geopolitical	theory
to	 history	 demonstrates	 that	 the	 confrontation
between	 the	 Russian	 Empire	 and	 the	 British
Crown	had	been	pre-determined	by	fundamental
geopolitical	parameters.	All	principal	conflicts	of
the	second	half	of	the	nineteenth	and	the	early
twentieth	 century	 took	 place	 within	 the
framework	of	this	confrontation.	These	conflicts
included	the	Crimean	War,	the	Balkan	wars,	the
clashes	 in	 Afghanistan	 and	 Central	 Asia,	 the
intervention	in	China	in	1900	and	even	the	Russo-
Japanese	War	in	which	the	Brits	took	part.	On	the
sociopolitical	level,	all	of	these	wars	were	part	of
a	confrontation	between	two	monarchies.	At	that
time,	this	greater	conflict	was	passed	off	as	the
clash	between	imperial	(colonial	and	imperialist)
interests.	 Subsequently,	 when	 the	 Bolsheviks
came	to	power	in	Russia,	this	same	conflict	grew
into	 an	 ideological	 confrontation	 between
socialism	 and	 capitalism,	 but	 the	 geopolitical

essence	 remained	 the	 same.	 The	 geopolitical
analysis	also	explains	why	the	transition	to	new
ideological	models	in	Russia,	which	has	officially
accepted	liberal	democratic	values,	has	not	muted
previous	 geopolitical	 confrontations	 with	 the
liberal,	democratic	America.
Geopolitics	 makes	 the	 ideological	 factors
behind	the	Cold	War	less	relevant	by	tying	them
to	the	geopolitical	model.	It	does	not	mean	that
ideology	 does	 not	 play	 an	 important	 role	 —	 it
does,	and	will	continue	to	do	so.	But	the	ideology
itself	should	be	viewed	as	a	kind	of	sublimation
of	geopolitics	in	the	first	place.	Time	has	shown
that,	in	spite	of	our	rejection	of	the	ideology	that
allegedly	 led	 to	 the	 confrontation	 between	 the
USSR	and	the	US,	the	relations	between	Russia
and	the	West	have	not	improved.	Russia	is	still
treated	 with	 distrust,	 misunderstanding	 and
suspicion.	NATO	is	expanding	towards	the	East
and	bombs	our	allies,	the	Serbs.	We	continue	to

make	concessions,	but	are	told	that	Russia	has	‘a
criminal	oligarchic	regime’,	that	‘Russians	have
the	 wrong	 model	 of	 democracy’	 and	 so	 on.	 It
means	that	the	West	will	always	find	excuses	for
viewing	Russia	as	an	enemy,	and	such	behaviour
has	geopolitical	implications.
The	geopolitical	method	is	important	because
it	is	replacing	ideological	gimmickry.	The	West
has	nothing	to	justify	its	continuing	confrontation
with	 Russia	 besides	 geopolitics,	 which	 explains
the	success	of	Zbigniew	Brzezinski’s	 ideas	 and
his	 book	The	 Grand	 Chessboard.
[191]
	On	 the
surface,	they	don’t	have	any	arguments	to	explain
this	 situation,	 and	 neither	 do	 we.	 Russia	 has
become	 a	 democratic	 state:	 there	 is	 a	 party
system	and	a	nationally	elected	President,	which
means	that	a	value	system	formally	similar	to	the
Western	one	now	exists.	But	the	substantive	part
of	 our	 civilisation	 has	 turned	 out	 to	 be
fundamentally	 different.	 In	 order	 to	 establish

Russia’s	 place	 in	 the	 contemporary	 world,	 we
need	geopolitics.	This	is	not	a	short-lived	fad:	it
is	our	destiny.
Taking	 into	 consideration	 the	 fundamental
dualism	 of	 a	 world	 civilisation	 that	 consists	 of
two	opposing	systems,	geopolitics	today	consists
of	two	global	centres	where	theory	coincides	with
practice,	 with	 the	 decision-making,	 and	 with
global	influence	—	the	US	and	Russia.	In	the	US
the	 most	 influential	 organisation	 in	 the
geopolitical	 sphere	 is	 the	 Council	 on	 Foreign
Relations	(CFR).
[192]
	Its	main	theorists,	Zbigniew
Brzezinski	 and	 Henry	 Kissinger,	 also	 influence
international	 organisations	 that	 make	 important
geopolitical	decisions:	the	Trilateral	Commission
and	the	Bilderberg	Club.	In	the	CFR,	geopolitics
determines	 the	 positions	 of	 the	 majority	 of	 US
Congressmen,	both	Republicans	and	Democrats,
on	 key	 strategic	 issues.	 This	 demonstrates	 the
universal	nature	of	geopolitics.	It	is	the	baseline

of	American	strategic	thinking!	Their	main	values
are	 formulated	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 geopolitical
principles,	foundations	and	imperatives,	and	the
only	 subject	 up	 for	 discussion	 is	 how	 to
implement	 them.	 Take,	 for	 instance,	 Francis
Fukuyama’s	 theory	 of	 ‘the	 end	 of	 history’	 and
Samuel	Huntington’s	‘clash	of	civilisations’.
[193]
These	are	the	two	forecasts	of	the	general	‘West-
centric’	 course	 of	 events	 in	 the	 geopolitical
sphere.	 Fukuyama	 proposes	 the	 creation	 of	 a
world	 power	 ‘here	 and	 now’,	 while	 Huntington
argues	that	this	project	must	be	delayed	because
there	 are	 still	 many	 contradictions	 in	 the
international	 arena.	 Both	 authors	 agree	 on	 the
purpose	they	have	in	mind,	unanimously	arguing
that	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 build	 a	 single,	 global
Western-oriented	 state	 under	 American	 control
and	to	establish	a	world	government.	Moreover,
Fukuyama	argues	that	now,	after	the	collapse	of
the	Soviet	Union	and	the	socialist	system,	is	the

best	time	to	do	it,	but	Huntington	believes	that	the
civilisations	of	the	world	still	have	to	undergo	a
complex	 process	 of	 creation	 and	 disintegration
into	new	political	blocs.	This	is	a	serious	dispute,
but	it	remains	strictly	within	the	limits	of	a	single
geopolitical	model.
Since	 the	 confrontation	 is	 taking	 place
between	 the	 Atlanticist	 world	 and	 the	 East
(Eurasia),	the	second	largest	pivot	of	geopolitical
thought	 is	 Russia.	 The	 Russian	 and	 American
worlds	 are	 still	 comparable	 in	 terms	 of	 their
geopolitical	weight.	American	strategists	do	the
thinking	for	the	entire	Western	world	and	for	the
entire	  sea	  civilisation,	  while	  Russian
geopoliticians	are	forced	to	think	in	terms	of	the
rest	of	the	continental	world:	the	land	civilisation
of	Eurasia.
The	chief	geopolitical	centre	in	Russia	is	the
Centre	 for	 Geopolitical	 Expertise	 (CGE).	 	 The
CGE	works	with	parliamentary	organs,	as	well	as

the	Security	Council,	law	enforcement	agencies
and	 the	 presidential	 administration.	 It	 develops
large-scale	  components	  of	  the	  Russian
geopolitical	strategy.	In	terms	of	its	functions,	the
CGE	is	the	Eurasian	equivalent	of	the	Council	on
Foreign	 Relations,	 but,	 sadly,	 it	 operates	 on	 a
much	 more	 modest	 scale,	 because	 the	 vital
necessity	 for	 geopolitical	 strategy	 has	 not	 yet
been	 fully	 understood	 by	 national	 leaders.	 But
this	is	merely	a	technical	issue	and	a	question	of
time.	 Besides,	 there	 are	 a	 number	 of	 other
institutions	 that	 claim	 to	 also	 be	 ‘geopolitical
centres’.	The	majority	of	them,	however,	are	only
interested	in	dealing	with	geopolitics	because	it	is
the	 trendy	 thing	 to	 do.	 There	 are	 relevant
subdivisions	  in	  most	  law	  enforcement
enforcement	agencies	bearing	other	names,	but,	in
fact,	 they	 are	 closely	 related	 to	 geopolitical
research.	 Overall,	 Russia	 is	 undergoing	 the
formation	 of	 a	 geopolitical	 school	 and	 of

geopolitics	 as	 a	 science.	 This	 is	 why	 there	 are
organisations	boasting	proud	names,	but	lacking
substance,	and	vice	versa.
If	 Western	 geopolitics	 cannot	 help	 but	 be
Atlanticist,	Russian	geopolitics	cannot	help	but	be
Eurasian.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 matter	 of	 choice,	 but	 a
question	of	national	survival.	Either	our	strategy
will	 be	 aimed	 at	 sustaining	 Russia	 as	 an
alternative	 to	 the	 West,	 or	 Russia	 will	 simply
cease	 to	 exist	 and	 will	 become	 an	 Eastern
appendix,	of	sorts,	to	the	West.	It	should	also	be
noted	 that	 between	 the	 two	 global	 geopolitical
poles	there	are	intermediate	zones,	the	so-called
‘rimland’	or	the	coastal	zones.	They	have	their
own	versions	of	geopolitics,	as	for	example	the
European	   school,	   whose	   outstanding
representative,	Yves	Lacoste,
[194]
	was	an	advisor
to	the	former	French	President	Mitterrand	and	is
the	editor	of	an	interesting	geopolitical	magazine,
Herodotus.	 His	 is	 a	 version	 of	 small-scale

geopolitics	that	steers	clear	of	the	generalisations
which	 are	 typical	 of	 American	 or	 Russian
geopolitics	  and	  were	  typical	  of	  Karl
Haushofer’s
[195]
	German	geopolitics.	At	the	same
time,	 the	 works	 of	 Pierre	 Béhar,	 such	 as	Une
géopolitique	 pour	 l’Europe:	 Vers	 une	 nouvelle
Eurasie?
[196]
	   and	   Pierre	   Gallois’
[197]
Geopolitique
[198]
	are	fairly	unbiased.	In	its	turn,
the	 German	 geopolitical	 school	 operated	 on	 a
global	scale.	Haushofer	was	a	strong	opponent	of
the	war	on	two	fronts.	He	argued	that,	in	terms	of
the	 laws	 of	 geopolitics,	 Germany	 is	 not	 an
independent	 pole	 but	 the	 ‘rimland’,	 an
intermediate	 space	 between	 Atlanticism	 and
Eurasianism,	 and	 therefore	 it	 must	 choose
whether	 to	 be	 allied	 with	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 or
England.	In	joining	the	USSR,	it	would	oppose
England,	and	in	joining	England	it	would	oppose
the	 USSR.	 As	 we	 all	 know,	 Hitler	 remained
indifferent	 to	 these	 warnings	 and	 pursued	 a

foolhardy	geopolitical	policy.	It	was	not	simply	a
mistake,	 it	 was	 a	 colossal	 crime	 against	 the
German	and	the	Russian	peoples,	in	fact	against
the	whole	world.	This	is	what	a	wrongly	chosen
geopolitical	model	may	lead	to!	In	geopolitical
terms,	incompetent	advisors	or	analysts	can	screw
things	 up.	 In	 general,	 however,	 the	 European
geopolitical	 school	 does	 exist	 and,	 as	 Europe
moves	 toward	 the	 status	 of	 an	 independent
political	subject,	it	will	actively	develop.	But	for
now,	it	is	only	an	emerging	phenomenon.	There
are	 not	 yet	 any	 large	 government	 centres.	 All
research	 is	 conducted	 by	 individual	 specialists,
such	 as	 the	 Austrian	 Jordi	 von	 Lochhausen;
Lacoste,	 Behar	 and	 Gallois	 in	 France;	 and	 the
Belgian,	Steuckers.
As	 a	 scientific	 field,	 geopolitics	 has	 many
adversaries.	As	a	rule,	such	adversaries	are	either
pure	 Marxists	 or	 pure	 liberals,	 like	 Soros.
[199]
They	 strive	 to	 apply	 universality	 to	 their	 own,

rather	 totalitarian	 ideologies	 and	 deny	 the
influence	 of	 geographical	 space	 on	 history	 and
politics.	Nevertheless,	this	science	is	becoming	a
new	way	of	thinking	and	a	new	political	language
of	 the	 twenty-first	 century,	 without	 which	 it	 is
impossible	 to	 understand	 any	 of	 Russia’s
domestic	 or	 external	 problems.	 Today	 any	 top
leader	 or	 manager	 must	 think	 territorially	 and
operate	within	geopolitical	categories.	If	Putin	is
going	to	regain	Russia’s	status	as	a	geopolitical
subject	in	earnest,	he	should	also	be	thinking	in
terms	of	geopolitics.
Patriotic	Enlightenment
The	US	is	systematically	moving	towards	world
domination.	This	is	the	official	project	of	their
foreign	policy,	irrespective	of	who	has	the	power,
the	  neoconservatives	  or	  the	  Democrats.
Strategically	speaking,	they	control	the	world	by
holding	 power	 over	 the	 coastal	 zone	 of	 the

Eurasian	continent,	which	must	constantly	expand
further	 into	 the	 continent.	 For	 Russia	 and	 the
post-Soviet	 space,	 this	 Grand	 Chess	 game	 can
mean	 only	 one	 thing:	 the	 unipolar	 world
dominated	by	the	US	will	be	established	at	our
expense,	and	it	is	being	brought	about	by	means
of	forces	from	abroad.	The	scenario	is	the	same
for	 the	 entire	 post-Soviet	 space:	 pro-American
forces,	backed	by	local	nationalists,	overthrow	the
indecisive	 Moscow-leaning	 regimes	 and	 initiate
cycles	 of	 instability	 in	 Russia’s	 periphery,
especially	 where	 the	 ethnic	 makeup	 leaves
nations	prone	to	internal	conflict.	 The	 strategic
plan	of	the	US	for	the	next	decade	is	to	ultimately
strip	Moscow	of	control	over	the	CIS	states	and	to
begin	the	disintegration	of	the	RF	itself.
In	particular,	the	situation	in	the	Caucasus	is	a
direct	consequence	of	Western	plans	to	enhance
American	hegemony.	This	plan	is	in	effect	now
and	is	called	the	‘Project	for	the	New	American

Century’.
[200]
	The	Rose	revolution	in	Tbilisi	was	a
key	part	of	the	plan.	As	Shevardnadze
[201]
	was	torn
between	Washington	and	Moscow,	the	young	pro-
American	nationalist	Saakashvili	was	brought	to
power,	thus	implementing	the	plan	to	destabilise
the	weak	point	of	the	entire	Eurasian	geopolitical
construction.	It	was	followed	by	the	treacherous
invasion	 of	 South	 Ossetia,	 which	 halted	 the
implementation	of	the	plan	but	did	not	annul	it:
the	 US	 has	 continued	 to	 rearm	 Georgia	 after	 a
short	 respite.	 In	 a	 recent	 interview,	 Vladimir
Putin	 unambiguously	 expressed	 his	 attitude
towards	the	forthcoming	upsurge	in	violence	in
the	 Caucasus:	 ‘I	 can	 see	 that	 the	 intentions	 of
today’s	 American	 administration	 are	 clearly
evident.	But	there	is	another	point	to	be	made.	For
example,	 further	 rearmament	 of	 Georgia	 is
currently	in	effect.	What	for?	This	is	reality	—	it
is	something	we	can	see	with	our	own	eyes.	If
there	 had	 been	 no	 rearmament	 two	 years	 ago,

there	 would	 have	 been	 no	 aggressions	 and	 no
blood	would	have	been	spilled.	By	the	way,	our
partners	 were	 well	 aware	 that	 this	 was	 taking
place,	including	our	European	allies.	But	nobody
responded.	And	what	do	we	have	now?	They	have
escalated	the	situation	to	the	point	of	war.	And
now	the	rearmament	continues.’
[202]
Gorbachev’s	and	Yeltsin’s	Atlanticist
Heritage	among	Putin’s	Entourage
Under	 Gorbachev	 and	 Yeltsin,	 Moscow	 was
overtly	 playing	 up	 to	 Washington,	 unilaterally
removing	all	the	obstacles	that	stood	in	the	way
of	 the	 American	 domination	 of	 the	 world:	 the
Warsaw	treaty	and	the	USSR.	Moscow	sided	with
the	 US	 (in	 other	 words,	 against	 itself).	 Such
behaviour	 is	 best	 described	 as	 ‘geopolitical
betrayal’,	pure	and	simple.	Vladimir	Putin	came
to	power	as	Russia	was	trying	hard	to	shrug	off
the	self-destructive	strategy	of	the	1990s.	Putin

was	elected	for	his	brawn	—	for	his	intent	to	put
an	 end	 to	 the	 surrender	 of	 Russian	 interests	 in
domestic	 and	 foreign	 policy.	 Putin	 responded
adequately	to	Basayev’s
[203]
	invasion	of	Dagestan
and	he	was	granted	geopolitical	 legitimacy	 and
the	 people’s	 support,	 but	 he	 failed	 to	 reach	 a
geopolitical	 turning	 point	 during	 his	 first	 term.
The	 pro-Western	 Atlanticist	 experts	 inherited
from	 the	 Yeltsin	 era	 steered	 Putin	 toward
Atlanticism	 during	 crucial	 moments,	 and	 any
compromise	with	Atlanticism	was	equivalent	to
the	rejection	of	Moscow’s	own	strategic	interests.
Moscow’s	 solidarity	 with	 Washington	 on	 the
issue	of	so-called	‘international	terrorism’	did	not
and	could	not	yield	any	concrete	results:	the	West
still	puts	pressure	on	the	Kremlin	in	terms	of	the
North	 Caucasus	 issue,	 and	 American	 military
bases	in	Central	Asia	don’t	do	much	for	Russia’s
national	security.
Due	to	the	efforts	of	the	Atlanticist	group	in

the	 President’s	 entourage,	 Putin’s	 patriotic
strategy	 during	 his	 first	 term	 failed	 to	 reach	 a
point	 where	 it	 could	 become	 irreversible,
preventing	 Russia	 from	 finally	 establishing	 its
path	towards	a	geopolitical	revival.
South	Ossetia:	A	Critical	Point	for	Russian
Geopolitics
The	contradictory	nature	of	Putin’s	geopolitical
stance	 revealed	 itself	 in	 his	 relations	 with
Saakashvili,	who	was	brought	to	power	precisely
to	 intensify	 conflict	 with	 Russia,	 to	 ultimately
remove	 Russian	 influence	 from	 Georgia	 and	 to
create	 the	 conditions	 necessary	 for	 the
deployment	of	American	forces	in	the	Caucasus.
This	plan	was	part	of	Bush’s	‘Greater	Middle	East
Initiative’
[204]
	 and	 involved	 attempts	 to	 further
destabilise	the	North	Caucasus	area.	This	strategy
included	 the	 key	 elements	 of	 the	 murder	 of
Akhmat	Kadyrov	and	an	uprising	in	Ingushetia,

with	a	subsequent	permanent	destabilisation	and
guerrilla	insurgency	in	Kizlyar.	Riots	in	Kabarda
and	a	new	tension	cycle	in	Karachay-Cherkessia
are	on	the	agenda	as	well.	His	Atlanticist	advisors
and	direct	pressure	from	Washington	convinced
the	Russian	President	that	Saakashvili	would	be
content	 with	Ajara	 alone	 and	 thus	 the	 problem
would	 be	 solved.	 	 This	 was	 a	 serious	 political
error.	 Saakashvili	 will	 always	 act	 in	 strict
accordance	with	the	nationalistic	agenda	devised
in	 Washington:	 the	 more	 Russia	 follows
Georgia’s	lead,	the	better.	The	US	does	not	see
Russia	as	an	equal	partner,	but	rather	as	a	force	to
negotiate	 with.	 Having	 coerced	 Russia	 into
ousting	Abashidze,	Saakashvili	started	to	insist	on
the	 ‘eviction’	 of	 Kokoity
[205]
	 and	 Bagapsh.
[206]
When	 Moscow	 tried	 to	 resist,	 Washington,	 as
usual,	decided	to	aggravate	the	situation.
The	tragedy	in	South	Ossetia	in	August	2008
became	a	kind	of	test	for	Vladimir	Putin:	would

he	actually	step	back	and	delegate	his	real	powers
to	 the	 more	 liberal	 and	 West-oriented	 Dmitry
Medvedev,	 or	 would	 he	 remain	 in	 control	 of
principal	 strategic	 issues	 related	 to	 the
preservation	of	Russian	sovereignty?
South	Ossetia:	President	Putin’s
Geopolitical	Choice
In	August	2008	Vladimir	Putin	found	himself	at	a
point	of	fundamental	bifurcation:	his	geopolitical
legitimacy	(patriotism	and	Eurasianism)	obliged
him	 to	 actively	 support	 South	 Ossetia.	 The
situation	 was	 particularly	 crucial	 because	 the
force	 Saakashvili	 was	 up	 against	 was	 not	 a
rebellious	clan,	but	the	ancient,	militant	Ossetian
ethnos	who	had	joined	Russia	voluntarily	back	in
the	 day	 and	 had	 historically	 functioned	 as	 a
Russian	outpost	in	the	Caucasus.	North	Ossetia,
too,	will	never	agree	to	the	radical	separation	of
the	South	Ossetian	lands	from	Russia.	If	he	had

done	 in	 South	 Ossetia	 what	 he	 had	 done	 to
Adzharia,	  Vladimir	  Putin	  would	  have
permanently	 lost	 his	 legitimacy	 with	 the
patriotically-inclined	 segment	 of	 the	 Russian
society	 that	 acts	 as	 the	 basis	 of	 his	 political
support,	 and	 he	 understood	 this	 perfectly.	 The
surrender	 of	 South	 Ossetia	 would	 have	 been	 a
personal	 catastrophe	 for	 him:	 the	 end	 of	 his
political	legitimacy	and	the	denunciation	of	his
mission	 to	 revive	 statehood.	 But	 a	 drastic
measure	 in	 relation	 to	 Tskhinvali	 was	 not	 easy
either:	 it	 meant	 a	 drastic	 falling	 out	 with
Washington,	as	well	as	possible	direct	sabotage
by	 the	 pro-American	 agents	 of	 influence
controlling	many	strategic	issues	in	the	Russian
economy,	 the	 community	 of	 experts	 and	 the
media.
With	every	new	step	the	US	took	to	undermine
Russia,	the	compromise	between	patriotism	and
Westernism	that	had	served	as	the	basis	of	Putin’s

geopolitical	formula	during	his	first	eight	years	in
office	 became	 less	 plausible.	 One	 can	 only
imagine	how	difficult	Putin’s	choice	was:	to	be
on	the	side	of	his	country	and	its	people	meant	to
challenge	the	overseas	colossus;	to	surrender	to
pressure	from	the	Atlanticist	colossus	meant	the
betrayal	of	Russia	and	its	national	history.
Today,	 Putin	 faces	 yet	 another	 dilemma:	 to
loosen	his	grip	on	the	country,	which	is	what	the
newly	 rising	 liberal-Atlanticist	 lobby	 in
Medvedev’s	 entourage	 wants	 him	 to	 do,	 or	 to
assume	responsibility	for	Russia	and	the	destiny
of	 its	 people,	 starting	 a	 new	 cycle	 of	 patriotic
history	and	rebuilding	Russia’s	status	as	a	great
world	power.	The	Munich	speech	that	startled	the
Western	community	has	become	Putin’s	genuine
political	platform:	‘In	fact,	it	was	the	truth.	I	told
the	truth’,	Putin	said	several	years	after	making
that	 speech.	 ‘I	 simply	 had	 not	 realised	 its
importance	at	the	time...	They	told	us	one	thing,

and	would	do	the	complete	opposite.	In	fact,	they
have	duped	us	in	every	sense	of	the	word!	During
the	 withdrawal	 of	 our	 troops	 from	 Eastern
Europe,	the	NATO	Secretary	General	told	us	that
the	USSR	could	at	least	be	sure	that	NATO	would
not	expand	beyond	its	current	borders.	So	what
happened	to	that	promise?	I	asked	them	directly,
but	they	have	nothing	to	say.	They	cheated	us	in
the	most	primitive	way.	By	the	way,	I	have	to	say
it,	unfortunately,	and	I	will	say	it	out	loud	right
away,	without	hesitation:	tactics	like	cheating	are
very	common	in	politics	when	it	comes	to	global
issues,	and	we	have	to	move	forward	with	this	in
mind.’
[207]
Vladimir	 Putin’s	 Munich	 speech	 became	 the
programme	of	his	return	as	a	political	figure	who
had	finally	embarked	on	a	path	toward	Russia’s
revival.	In	this	respect,	2012	should	be	considered
a	turning	point.	Vladimir	Putin	may	return	only	as
a	historical	figure	who	has	finally	accepted	the

mission	 to	 revive	 Russia	 as	 a	 great	 power.
Otherwise,	everything	that	he	had	said	and	done
before	would	be	pointless.	Russia	is	waiting	for	a
leader	to	help	her	regain	her	previous	greatness.
Putin:	I	Renounce	the	Devil
Lately,	the	principal	aspects	of	Vladimir	Putin’s
statements	regarding	Russia’s	new	foreign	policy,
which	 stem	 from	 his	 decisive	 intent	 to	 raise
Russia	to	the	status	of	a	great	world	power	and	to
make	her	an	independent	and	influential	actor	on
a	global	scale,	are	becoming	clearer.	For	the	first
time,	 Vladimir	 Putin	 is	 letting	 the	 world	 know
how	 he	 envisions	 Russia’s	 role	 within	 the	 G8.
And	this,	in	turn,	has	shed	light	on	the	Kremlin’s
approach	to	its	relations	with	the	West	and	the
rest	of	the	world.	‘I	know	that	there	are	inveterate
haters	of	our	country.	They	are	still	living	in	the
previous	century	and	all	of	them	are	specialists	in
Sovietology.	Even	though	the	Soviet	Union	has

ceased	to	exist,	they	are	still	there,	because	they
have	no	other	specialty...	Nobody	wants	the	G8	to
turn	into	an	assembly	of	‘fat	cats’,	because	the
differences	 and	 imbalances	 in	 the	 world	 are
growing,’	declared	Vladimir	Putin	in	response	to
allegations	 made	 by	 US	 Secretary	 of	 State
Condoleezza	 Rice	 when	 she	 protested	 against
Russia’s	chairmanship	of	the	G8.
[208]
There	is,	in	fact,	a	very	legitimate	geopolitical
concept	 behind	 Putin’s	 ‘fat	 cats’	 metaphor	 and
the	‘golden	billion’	reference.
[209]
	The	G7,	that	is,
the	 G8	 minus	 Russia,	 was	 a	 club	 of	 the	 most
developed	countries	(sometimes	also	dubbed	‘the
First	 World’).	 At	 the	 opposing	 end	 there	 are
emerging	 markets	 —	 the	 ‘Third	 World’.
Previously,	 the	 USSR	 had	 been	 considered	 the
‘Second	World’,	a	specific	geopolitical	entity	that
was	less	developed	technologically,	economically
and	socially	than	the	West,	but	more	successful
than	 Third	 World	 countries.	 During	 Yeltsin’s

presidency,	Russia	desperately	tried	to	qualify	for
the	 ‘First	 World’	 league	 and	 was	 ready	 to
sacrifice	 everything,	 including	 its	 traditional
areas	of	influence	in	Asia	and	the	East,	to	get	it.
Join	 the	 West	 at	 any	 cost,	 even	 at	 the	 cost	 of
Russia’s	 disintegration	 —	 such	 was	 the	 course
outlined	by	pro-Western	politicians.	But	in	trying
to	enter	the	‘golden	billion’,	Yeltsin’s	Russia	not
only	lost	its	global	position,	but	lagged	even	more
significantly	behind	the	West.	There	was	a	great
risk	of	the	country	turning	into	the	backyard	of
civilisation.	As	a	result,	we	almost	slipped	into
the	‘Third	World’.	The	two-faced	West	actually
encouraged	Moscow’s	self-liquidation	and	made
Russia	 a	 member	 of	 the	 G8	 as	 a	 reward,
remembering	to	move	NATO	institutions	closer
to	 our	 borders	 and	 to	 remove	 the	 post-Soviet
territories	on	a	piecemeal	basis	from	the	zones	of
our	influence.	Vladimir	Putin	put	an	end	to	all	of
this.	Putin’s	motto	was	to	preserve	Russia’s	status

as	 ‘Second	 World’	 by	 all	 means,	 and	 his
perseverance	in	conducting	this	independent	and
self-sustained	 policy	 was	 met	 with	 growing
hostility	from	the	West.
Putin’s	 Russia	 is	 becoming	 more	 and	 more
aware	of	her	global	mission	—	counterbalancing
the	unilateral	domination	of	the	‘Rich	North’	and
building	 a	 fair	 world	 order	 which	 favours	 the
interests	 and	 wishes	 of	 all	 countries	 and
civilisations.	Contemporary	Russia	does	not	have
sufficient	 strategic	 potential	 to	 unilaterally
balance	the	Western	pole,	like	it	did	in	the	Soviet
era.	But	it	has	enough	energy,	while	remaining
one	of	the	most	developed	countries,	to	speak	for
all	 of	 those	 who	 have	 been	 humiliated	 and
insulted.	Putin	once	said,	rather	unambiguously,
‘Firstly,	 we	 still	 have	 enough	 missiles,	 besides
which,	we	are	developing	our	nuclear	deterrence
capability.	 [...]	 Two	 years	 ago	 we	 conducted
successful	tests	of	such	missiles	which	have	never

existed	before	and	which	no	other	country	could
put	 into	 operation	 before	 us.	 These	 are	 very
advanced	weapons	for	which	it	does	not	matter
whether	 there	 are	 missile	 defence	 systems	 in
place.’	From	here	on	it	is	clear	that	all	attacks	by
the	 ‘inveterate	 Sovietologists’	 who	 continue	 to
apply	a	‘Cold	War’	mentality	to	our	country	will
be	 fended	 off	 unceremoniously.	 As	 Putin	 said
when	talking	about	his	adversaries	in	the	West,
‘There	is	no	point	arguing	with	them...		What	can
you	say	to	such	people?	They	only	deserve	one
small	remark:	‘Screw	you!’	and	that’s	it.’
[210]
	So,
in	 telling	 the	 so-called	 ‘Sovietologists’	 to	 piss
off,	 Putin	 symbolically	 rejected	 Atlanticist
geopolitics,	 based	 as	 it	 principally	 is	 on
opposition	to	the	continental	states	occupying	the
central	 region	 of	 Northeast	 Eurasia	 (be	 it	 the
Russian	Empire,	the	USSR	or	the	new,	democratic
Russia).	This	gesture	is	not	unlike	an	Orthodox
baptism,	where	the	baptised	person	turns	to	the

West,	to	the	place	where	Lucifer	was	cast	down,
and	spits	three	times,	repeating	‘I	renounce	the
Devil.’
Let	us	call	a	spade	a	spade:	Vladimir	Putin’s
conduct	 and	 his	 statements	 are	 signs	 of	 a
historical	recoup,	a	re-establishment	of	our	status
as	‘Second	World’,	and	an	aspiration	to	be	at	the
forefront	of	the	complex	but	rightful	construction
of	the	new	multipolar	world.
President	Putin’s	Liberal	Reform
A	Geopolitical	Analysis
Geopolitics	as	something	for	the	mentality	of	the
country’s	leaders,	and	as	a	science	about	power
and	for	power,	had	long	been	expressly	prohibited
by	 Communist	 ideology.	 The	 importance	 of
geopolitics	 for	 Russia	 was	 revealed	 only	 when
Vladimir	 Putin	 came	 to	 power.	 Geopolitics
involves	 analysis	 of	 the	 world	 and	 world

processes	tied	to	geographical	realities,	to	a	place,
space,	and	a	topos,
[211]
	and	each	of	these	notions
acquires	a	cultural	and	civilisational	significance.
For	 example,	 when	 we	 speak	 of	 democracy,
nationalism,	liberalism	and	monarchy	we	need	to
refer	 these	 notions	 to	 the	 places	 where	 they
developed	and	formed.	When	we	see	that	space,
taken	in	a	deep	sense,	in	conjunction	with	culture
and	tradition,	creates	and	produces	various	types
of	 democracies,	 nationalisms,	 monarchisms,
political	 constructions	 and	 economic	 systems,
then	 we	 can	 discuss	 Russian,	 Eurasian	 and
Western	democracies	separately,	and	talk	about
how	‘democracy’	is	applied	to	the	East.
The	 same	 goes	 for	 economic	 models.	 It	 is
necessary	 to	 place	 both	 ‘economic	 plans’	 and
‘markets’	 in	 their	 actual	 geographical	 and
historico-cultural-geographic	contexts	instead	of
treating	them	as	separate	entities.	But	the	easiest
expression	of	geopolitics	can	be	summarised	as	in

the	following:	there	is	a	permanent	historical	and
civilisational	  contradiction	  between	  the
contemporary	  Eurasian	  model	  of	  many
civilisations	 and	 the	 contemporary	 Atlanticist,
Western	 one	 with	 its	 ideas	 about	 its	 own
universality	  and	  exclusiveness,	  and	  this
contradiction	cannot	be	reduced	to	problems	of
ideology.	  This	  fundamental	  geopolitical
contradiction	has	existed	since	Russia	and	Britain
were	 empires	 and	 monarchies.	 When	 Russia
became	democratic,	these	antagonisms	with	the
democratic	West	did	not	vanish.	NATO	continued
to	expand	eastwards	and	bombed	the	Serbs	(our
geopolitical	 allies),	 thus	 only	 confirming	 the
basic	 laws	 of	 geopolitics,	 which	 state	 that
civilisational	 space	 and	 cultural	 geography
determine	the	historical	relations	between	large
geopolitical	blocs,	people	and	powers.
The	Eurasian	Project:	The	Path	to

Superpower
Without	rejecting	liberalism	in	its	absolute	sense,
one	 should	 nevertheless	 reject	 the	 recipe	 for
Western-type	 liberalism	 that	 the	 Atlanticist
geopolitical	forces	are	forcing	upon	us.	It	is	clear
that	some	elements	of	liberalism	in	the	economy
must	 be	 adapted	 to	 the	 peculiarities	 of	 our
Eurasian	 reality.	 As	 for	 Soviet	 and	 Tsarist
projects,	those	historical	forms	of	 our	 common
Eurasian	 path	 are	 now	 outdated	 in	 Russian
history.	 One	 should	 not	 insist	 on	 their	 total
rejection	 or	 refutation,	 but	 understand	 that
historically	they	have	run	dry.
The	Eurasian	model	is	a	contemplation	of	our
current	 situation	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 qualitative
civilisational	space.	We	must	preserve	the	main
impulse	 (geographical,	 historical,	 cultural,
civilisational)	 of	 the	 previous	 stages	 in	 the
development	of	our	state	and	develop	a	brand	new
and	 unique	 mentality	 for	 twenty-first	 century

Russia.	We	must	move	forward:	not	just	go	back
into	the	past,	but	create	a	new	synthesis.	Putin’s
federal	reforms	must	be	assessed	from	this	point
of	view.
The	appointment	of	Vladimir	Putin	as	acting
Prime	 Minister	 represented	 the	 start	 of	 a	 new
stage	 in	 the	 history	 of	 the	 Russian	 state.	 The
substantive	part	of	the	events	and	transformations
that	 had	 taken	 place	 in	 the	 years	 before	 the
emergence	of	Putin	represented	a	transition	from
the	Communist	model	to	a	liberal	democratic	one.
The	explosive	events	between	the	late	1980s	to
the	 late	 1990s	 developed	 along	 these	 lines.	 By
Yeltsin’s	 midterm,	 however,	 it	 was	 already
evident	 that	 a	 direct	 introduction	 of	 Western
liberal	values	into	Russia	is	impossible	because	it
is	confronted	by	a	profound	resistance,	not	only
from	the	opposition	but	from	the	basic	archetypes
of	our	national	way	of	life.
The	 new	 course	 was	 already	 maturing	 with

Yeltsin,	 when	 the	 introduction	 of	 patriotic	 and
strong	state	values	into	Russian	ideology	began	to
take	root,	but	with	Yeltsin	in	power	this	process
was	 not	 fully	 realised.	 His	 successor,	 Vladimir
Putin,	embodied	this	exact	course	—	a	course	for
the	establishment	of	a	new	and	strong	state	policy
and	 for	 the	 consolidation	 of	 the	 entire	 Russian
society	during	a	difficult	historical	period,	when
the	principal	values	of	our	state	were	at	stake.
Putin’s	course,	his	tough	stance	on	the	brash
Wahhabi	attack	in	Dagestan,	and	on	the	seizure	of
Dagestani	territories	by	the	Wahhabis	during	the
second	 Chechen	 campaign,	 coupled	 with	 his
federal	 reforms,	 were	 aimed	 at	 strengthening
Russian	statehood.
Largely,	this	became	a	revolution	from	above.
We	progressed	from	Communism	to	democracy,
and	 subsequently,	 with	 Putin,	 from	 a	 pro-
Western,	extremist,	liberal	democratic	Atlanticist
model	to	a	patriotic	Eurasian	course.	This	intense

process	affected	absolutely	everyone.	It	caused	a
shift	in	mentality	and	was	a	lot	more	significant
than	 a	 mere	 redistribution	 of	 property	 or	 of
powers	 and	 authority.	 Putin	 proclaimed	 it	 and
Putin	started	to	carry	it	out.
The	Unification	Strategy	of	Russian	Lands
Putin’s	policy	on	Chechnya	can	be	considered	the
beginning	 of	 a	 federal	 reform	 —	 not	 a	 single
episode	 in	 itself,	 but	 it	 was	 the	 beginning	 of
something	 bigger.	 First,	 it	 was	 necessary	 to
suppress	the	hotbeds	of	separatism	in	the	Russian
Federation,	 which	 stemmed	 not	 only	 from
Chechnya	and	Dagestan.	At	that	point	there	was
an	enormous	threat	to	the	territorial	integrity	of
our	 state	 due	 to	 the	 abuse	 of	 power	 by	 the
parochial	 governors’	 systems.	 The	 governors
themselves	 had	 largely	 transformed	 into	 little
tsars,	establishing	semi-criminal	regimes	that	had
very	weak	links	not	only	with	law	but	to	unity

with	the	centre.
The	Yeltsin	period	saw	the	beginning	of	the
objectionable	practice	of	political	trade	between
the	regions	and	the	centre:	the	centre	put	pressure
on	the	regions,	imposing	its	conditions,	and	the
regional	governors	then	bargained	with	the	centre.
There	was	no	consistent	policy	between	the	centre
and	the	regions	with	Yeltsin.	The	prospects	for
the	 breakup	 of	 the	 state	 were	 becoming	 more
acute,	 and	 the	 sole	 legal	 administrative,
managerial	 authority	 of	 the	 country	 was
disrupted.	Basically,	the	threat	of	disintegration
was	growing.
I	 work	 with	 a	 lot	 of	 materials	 from	 various
Western	 projects	 and	 services,	 both	 secret	 and
semi-secret,	and	I	can	honestly	say	that	behind
the	 governors’	 abuse	 of	 power	 in	 the	 Yeltsin
period	 there	 were	 constant	 and	 omnipresent
strategies	 and	 scenarios	 devised	 by	 our
geopolitical	 enemy.	 Directly	 or	 indirectly,	 by

economic,	political	and	other	structural,	industrial
and	 diplomatic	 methods,	 the	Americans	 pushed
on	 with	 their	 scenario	 for	 a	 geopolitical
dismemberment	of	the	Large	Space.
[212]
	Chechnya
was	the	peak	in	the	efforts	of	the	Western	secret
services,	via	Turkey	and	Saudi	Arabia,	to	explore
the	 possibility	 of	 dismembering	 Russia	 in	 the
most	 extreme	 form:	 by	 setting	 the	 heretical
pseudo-Islamic	 Wahhabi	 sect	 against	 the
Russians.	 Putin	 challenged	 this	 disintegration
process,	 and	 his	 federal	 reform	 became	 the
extension	of	this	challenge.	I	think	that	it	had	a
clear	purpose:	it	is	a	consistent	policy	of	unifying
Russian	lands.	We	can	also	mention	his	support
for	the	creation	of	the	Union	State	of	Russia	and
Belarus	and	the	integration	of	the	countries	of	the
Customs	Union
[213]
	into	the	CIS.
Putin	 was	 forced	 to	 take	 extraordinary
measures	in	order	to	extinguish	a	fire.	If,	when
fighting	a	fire,	the	firemen	step	on	a	crystal	glass

set,	it	is	really	insignificant	when	compared	to	the
fact	 that	 peoples’	 lives	 and	 the	 surrounding
buildings	are	saved.	I	also	want	to	note	that	the
regions	  should	  receive	  some	  form	  of
compensation	 when	 the	 sovereign	 powers	 that
they	managed	to	acquire	during	the	period	of	the
‘derelict’	state	management	of	the	Yeltsin	era	are
revoked.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 reparations	 or
payments;	it	is	a	necessity	to	explain	again	to	the
regions,	and	to	the	Russian	people	living	in	most
of	these	regions,	and	to	the	other	Russian	ethnic
groups	as	well,	why	they	should	actually	be	part
of	a	single	state.								
This	is	where	the	idea	of	Eurasia	can	help.	It
does	 not	 reject	 the	 previous	 forms	 of	 Russia’s
mobilisation	 into	 a	 single	 state.	 Before	 1917
Russia	  followed	  the	Uvarov	 formula:
[214]
Orthodoxy,	 monarchy	 and	 nationality	explained
the	unity	of	the	state	and	the	people.	During	the
Soviet	 period	 there	 existed	 an	 idea	 of

international	 friendship	 between	 people	 in	 a
socialist	state,	and	it	was	an	incentive	to	bring
them	together	into	a	unified	state.	Today,	these
principles	are	outdated.	Saying	that	we	must	be	in
a	unified	state	for	the	sake	of	democracy	is	absurd
because	our	democracy	is	a	very	uncertain	thing,
and	 not	 yet	 fully	 formed.	 Practically	 no	 sane
people	 can	 be	 mobilised	 by	 this	 notion	 into	 a
conscious	and	wilful	preservation	of	the	unity	of
the	state.	In	light	of	this,	we	must	develop	a	new
incentive	system.
The	Concept	of	the	All-Eurasian	Destiny
The	Eurasian	ideology	that	we	are	developing	is
not	yet	a	consummate	complex	of	ideas;	it	is	an
idea	in	progress.	This	evolving	mentality	is	based
on	the	‘concept	of	the	all-Eurasian	destiny’.	The
peoples	living	within	the	territory	of	Russia,	and
more	broadly	within	the	territory	of	Eurasia,	are
united	 by	 a	 certain	 civilisational	 attitude.	 It	 is

especially	evident	when	our	people	travel	to	the
West.	 I	 talked	 in	 Moscow	 with	 a	 prominent
businessman	of	Chechen	origin.	He	told	me	that
when	he	was	in	the	West	(even	when	he	was	in
Turkey,	which	supposedly	has	a	mentality	similar
to	 the	 Chechens	 for	 a	 number	 of	 historical
reasons),	he	felt	like	a	Russian,	he	spoke	Russian,
and	 he	 thought	 of	 himself	 and	 of	 any	 other
representative	 of	 Russia	 —	 an	 Azerbaijani,	 an
Armenian,	 an	 ethnic	 Slav	 —	 as	 brothers	 in	 a
foreign	civilisation.	This	is	the	principle	of	the
common	 denominator	 in	 the	 face	 of	 a	 new
civilisation	—	Western,	Atlanticist,	and	based	on
alternative	principles.	The	contemporary	West	is
based	on	the	principle	of	individualism:	this	is
what	unites	all	Atlanticist	peoples	and	states.	The
Eurasian	 communities	 and	 peoples	 are	 used	 to
various	 forms	 of	 anti-individualism,	 communal
life	 and	 collectivism.	 A	 Russian	 or	 a	 Muslim
community	 —	 both	 are	 formed	 around	 a

collective	 mentality,	 open	 to	 the	 world	 and	 to
nature,	 whether	 these	 people	 are	 Islamic,
Buddhist	or	professing	any	other	religion.	These
elements	 of	 a	 traditional	 society,	 communal
psychology,	  and	  a	  single	  geographical,
civilisational	unity,	when	properly	analysed,	can
create	a	firm	basis	for	solidarity	within	a	state.	I
want	to	emphasise	that	we	should	not	forget	about
it,	especially	at	the	next	stage,	because	there	is	no
force	that	can	hold	different	people	and	regions
together.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 force.	 We
should	 use	 this	 mentality	 as	 a	 foundation	 for
Vladimir	Putin’s	federal,	centralised	reforms	of
integration	so	that	people	realise	that	they	belong
in	the	state	as	a	result	of	their	historical	choices
and	the	choices	of	their	ancestors.	We	must	delve
deep	into	history	in	order	to	try	to	single	out	this
common	 denominator.	 The	 Eurasian	 model,
developed	 by	 our	 predecessors,	 the	 founders	 of
Eurasianism	  in	  the	  1920s	  —	  Count

Trubetzkoy,
[215]
	 Savitsky,
[216]
	 Alexeyev
[217]
	 —
provides	us	with	an	excellent	starting	point.
Eurasianism	is	not	a	product	of	an	individual
creative	 process.	 It	 is	 an	 objective	 tendency.
Whether	the	leaders	of	our	nation	understand	it	or
not,	whether	they	think	in	terms	of	Eurasianism
and	 geopolitics	 or	 not,	 actions	 aimed	 at
strengthening	those	elements	that	will	lead	to	a
return	 of	 our	 superpower	 statehood,	 directly	 or
indirectly,	 consciously	 or	 unconsciously,	 will
steer	our	leaders	toward	Eurasian	geopolitics.	In
his	speeches,	Vladimir	Putin	constantly	uses	the
words	 ‘geopolitical’,	 ‘geopolitics’,	 and	 ‘the
geopolitical	 situation	 of	 Russia’.	 Pick	 up	 my
textbook	on	geopolitics	(which	I	wrote	and	which
was	accepted	by	the	majority	of	higher	education
institutions),	and	you	will	find	a	clear	definition
of	 geopolitics.
[218]
	 Putin	 uses	 the	 word
‘geopolitics’	and	understands	it	as	it	is	defined	in
my	textbook.

Today,	 it	 has	 become	 trendy	 among	 senior
military	 officers	 to	 write	 scientific	 theses	 and
books	 on	 geopolitics.	 Putin	 was	 seen	 at	 the
defence	 of	 a	 thesis	 by	 an	 admiral	 who	 talked
about	 the	 vast	 oceanic	 geopolitical	 spaces	 of
Russia.	If	the	President	is	surrounded	by	senior
military	 commanders	 who	 line	 up	 to	 defend
geopolitical	theses,	if	he	constantly	uses	the	term
‘geopolitics’,	if	he	conducts	actual	reforms	in	a
geopolitical,	Eurasian	way,	can	one	say	that	this
is	 just	 a	 coincidence?	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 not	 at	 all,
especially	given	that	my	book	on	geopolitics	is
almost	constantly	available	at	the	bookstore	in	the
presidential	administration	building.
Vladimir	Putin	as	a	Man	of	Destiny
My	 politological	 assessments	 are	 usually	 based
on	the	assumption	that	politics	is	a	continuation
of	spirit.	If	the	spirit	is	dirty,	the	politics	is	dirty
too;	if	the	spirit	is	clean,	the	politics	is	also	clean.

We	 have	 a	 false	 impression	 of	 politics	 as
something	done	by	a	showman,	a	demagogue	or	a
civil	servant.	Today,	politics	in	Russia	is	divorced
from	 ideas	 and	 our	 politicians	 change	 their
ideologies	as	often	as	they	change	their	clothes.
This	approach	is	doomed.	We	need	a	politics	of
ideas	 and	 we	 need	 relevant	 politicians.	 I	 am
convinced	that	a	new	type	of	person	must	enter
politics.	This	is	not	easy,	and	there	is	enormous
inertial	resistance.	There	are	relevant	techniques
as	well.	I	taught	a	course	on	political	philosophy
and	 I	 am	 aware	 of	 its	 techniques.
[219]
	 Strictly
speaking,	I	have	been	engaged	in	politics	since
the	early	1980s,	that	is,	I	am	one	of	the	oldest
Russian	 politicians.	 But	 only	 today	 have	 I
matured	  enough	  to	  assume	  personal
responsibility.	I	previously	thought	that	my	role
was	limited	to	simply	generating	political	ideas,
but	 it	 turned	 out	 that	 they	 were	 immediately
distorted	beyond	recognition.	My	almost	30-year

experience	in	Russian	politics	finally	motivated
me	speak	as	a	leader	backed	by	a	large	number	of
convinced	supporters	and	followers	who	gave	me
their	trust.
The	Revolutionary	Potential	of	Vladimir
Putin
I	think	that	we	underestimate	 the	 revolutionary
potential	of	Vladimir	Putin.	Not	as	a	personality,
but	 as	 a	 historic	 figure,	 predetermined	 by	 time
and	place.	He	was	appointed	acting	President	of
Russia	on	the	day	indicated	by	Nostradamus	as
the	 time	 of	 the	 coming	 of	 the	 ‘great	 King	 of
Terror’.	Putin	is	a	portent,	And	the	extraction	of
this	 portent	 from	 out	 of	 his	 political	 and
psychological	particulars	is	a	matter	of	the	most
sophisticated	theurgical	surgery.
My	late	friend,	the	great	French	writer	Jean
Parvulesco,
[220]
	 wrote	 a	 visionary	 book	 entitled
Putin	 and	 the	 Eurasian	 Empire
[221]
	in	which	 he

states	that	‘Vladimir	Putin	is	a	man	of	destiny.’	In
the	last	part	of	the	book	there	is	an	interview	with
me,	 in	 which	 I	 stated	 the	 problem	 as	 follows:
‘The	political	battle	for	Putin	is	a	battle	for	the
meaning	 of	 history’	 (‘La	 lutte	 politique	 pour
Vladimire	Poutine	c’est	la	lutte	pour	le	sens	de
l’histoire.’).	 But	 all	 this	 is	 located	 beyond
Yeltsinism,	and	not	everybody	will	be	able	to	take
a	 step	 beyond	 it.	 In	 time	 new	 people,	 new
political	organs	and	new	books	will	be	required.
At	some	point,	part	of	Russia’s	population	was
under	 the	 impression	 that	 we	 were	 moving
towards	a	‘liberal	dictatorship’,	when	Gräf-style
reforms	 would	 be	 introduced	 using	 Stalinist
methods.	 All	 things	 liberal	 are	 bad	 for	 the
Russians.	 The	 same	 goes	 for	 dictatorship.
Stalinist	 methods	 require	 a	 relevant	 mobilising
ideology:	something	that	can’t	be	achieved	with
liberalism,	 so	 concerns	 about	 liberalism	 are
pointless.	This	is	a	temporary	phenomenon	and

the	 entire	 liberal	 course	 will	 be	 gradually
discarded.	There’s	no	need	to	panic	prematurely.
We	 had	 better	 strengthen	 the	 superpower
statehood	policy	of	the	Russian	authorities	until
we	 have	 passed	 the	 point	 of	 no	 return.	 So	 far,
geopolitics	in	Russia	is	only	ripening.	Previous
convocations	 of	 our	 State	 Duma	 staged	 a
permanent	 farce	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 geopolitical
committee,	in	which	wild	LDPR	members	tried	to
discredit	 this	 discipline.	 Today	 the	 state	 of
geopolitics	is	still	unsatisfactory,	because	instead
of	 serious	 scientific	 work,	 analysis	 of	 sources,
translations,	 and	 so	 forth,	 everybody	 prefers	 to
copy	huge	chunks	from	my	textbooks	and	articles,
omitting	references,	and	then	dilutes	them	with
their	own	‘original’	rubbish.	I	think	that	the	wave
of	Duma	and	non-Duma	plagiarists	will	recede,
and	a	properly	qualified	school	of	geopolitics	will
be	 formed	 based	 on	 the	 foundations	 I	 have
already	laid	out.	But	it	requires	time.

There	is	another	extremely	important	point	to
be	 made	 here.	 There	 is	 a	 significant	 difference
between	the	pro-American	and	the	pro-European
course.	Russia’s	pro-European	course	is	part	of
the	Eurasian	geopolitical	strategy.	The	European
Union	shares	a	common	culture	with	the	US,	but
it	has	different	interests.	Europe’s	culture	is	very
different	from	Russian	culture,	but	we	sometimes
share	common	interests,	especially	when	it	comes
to	the	energy	sector.	A	strategic	union	between
Russia	and	Europe	is	important	for	both	Europe
and	 Russia,	 but	 unacceptable	 for	 the	 US.	 This
complex	 picture	 determines	 the	 frame	 of
Moscow’s	geopolitical	strategy.
Putin,	the	Secret	Service,	the	Army,	and
NATO
With	respect	to	the	secret	service,	the	Eurasian
course	involves	a	number	of	dialectics.	The	most
‘Eurasian’	secret	service	is	the	GRU,	or	military

intelligence	(the	Main	Intelligence	Directorate).
Since	the	interests	of	a	great	power,	irrespective
of	 its	 current	 political	 regime,	 are	 defended
primarily	by	the	army,	the	GRU	has	traditionally
performed	 the	 functions	 of	 strategic	 planning.
The	Soviet	Union’s	KGB,	just	as	in	the	present-
day	FSB,
[222]
	the	top	priority	was	political	issues,
which	are	subsidiary	in	geopolitics.	Starting	with
Gorbachev,	 the	 KGB	 began	 to	 play	 a	 negative
role,	losing	track	of	the	strategic	interests	of	the
country	and	the	Eastern	bloc	in	general,	in	turn
permitting	the	disintegration	of	the	USSR	and	its
entire	system.	This	was	accompanied	by	staving
off	 the	 GRU	 and	 the	 marginalisation	 of	 the
Armed	Forces.	In	the	next	stage,	the	KGB	itself
fell	 victim	 to	 anti-Eurasian	 inertia,	 and	 the
Ministry	 of	 Internal	 Affairs	 dealt	 mostly	 with
criminal	issues,	often	ignoring	politics	altogether,
let	 alone	 geopolitics.	 The	 strengthening	 of	 the
Ministry	 of	 Internal	Affairs	 began	 in	 the	 mid-

1990s,	 when	 the	 prevalent	 mood	 of	 Russian
politics	 and	 society	 in	 general	 was	 far	 from
Eurasianist.	In	fact,	it	was	exactly	the	opposite:
the	 dominant	 attitudes	 favoured	 Atlanticism,
opportunism,	 oligarchy,	 unbridled	 corruption,
overt	 disgust	 towards	 one’s	 own	 country,	 its
history	and	people,	hatred	of	the	state,	and	on	and
on.
But	as	the	external	political	situation	became
more	 pressing,	 the	 necessity	 of	 geopolitics	 for
Russia	 gained	 growing	 acceptance	 among	 the
establishment.	 The	 rise	 of	 Vladimir	 Putin,	 a
former	KGB	officer,	is	an	important	sign	of	this.
The	role	of	the	secret	service	was	reversed.	The
strengthening	of	the	KGB	became,	at	some	point,
an	 important	Eurasian	 element.	 It	 prepared	 the
country	for	a	gradual	transition	towards	a	fully-
fledged	strategic	mentality	and	the	domination	of
superpower	 interests	 over	 everything	 else.
Naturally,	 after	 the	 events	 of	 9/11,	 all	 this

reasoning	 was	 somehow	 overshadowed	 by	 the
political	realities	of	the	time.	In	this	regard	the
most	frightening	assumptions	are	possible	 —	 a
precedent	outlined	in	my	book	Conspirology.
[223]
There	is	another	decision	of	Vladimir	Putin’s
that	is	worth	mentioning.	He	approved	measures
related	 to	 a	 gradual	 replacement	 of	 the
conscription	 system	 by	 manning	 and	 equipping
the	Russian	Armed	Forces	on	a	contractual	basis.
I	know	a	thing	or	two	about	this	process,	because
I	developed	the	geopolitical	models	for	reforming
the	Armed	Forces	—	in	particular,	the	part	related
to	 strategic	 perspectives.	 I	 understand	 why
military	reform,	including	its	transition	towards	a
contractual	 basis,	 has	 been	 deliberately	 slowed
down.	 The	 truth	 is	 that	 military	 reform,	 as	 a
practice,	must	be	implemented	by	first	adjusting
the	 regulations	 of	 military	 doctrine	 in	 their
theoretical	 aspect.	 Such	 things	 are	 closely
intertwined	 and	 cannot	 exist	 separately.	 The

current	military	doctrine	is	ambiguous	because	it
does	not	answer	the	principal	question:	‘Who	is
our	 potential	 enemy?’	 And	 the	 answer	 to	 this
question	 underlies	 the	 entire	 military	 doctrine
and,	 correspondingly,	 the	 process	 of	 military
reform,	where	the	transition	towards	a	contractual
basis	 is	 just	 one	 of	 its	 elements.	 The	 principal
aspect,	the	potential	enemy,	has	been	at	the	centre
of	 the	 invisible	 but	 very	 active	 and	 aggressive
struggle	between	law	enforcement	agencies	and
ministries	and	the	political	leaders	of	the	country
for	many	years.
The	military	insists	that	since	the	Americans
view	Russia	or	the	so-called	Eurasian	bloc	as	one
of	their	most	likely	potential	enemies,	we	should
also	consider	the	US	as	our	principal	enemy.	This
is	quite	logical,	but	the	Kremlin	does	not	view	it
this	 way.	 As	 a	 result,	 Army	 reform	 is	 not
implemented	and	all	related	issues,	including	the
move	 toward	 a	 contractual	 basis,	 are	 markedly

speculative	 and	 abstract.	 A	 certain	 consensus
seems	to	have	been	reached	while	Putin	was	in
power:	 a	 national	 security	 concept	 that	 was
oriented	 toward	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 multipolar	 world
was	 adopted,	 which	 makes	 the	 US	 our	 primary
enemy	as	the	builder	of	a	unipolar	world.	But	then
the	 events	 of	 9/11	 threw	 our	 plans	 off:	 it	 was
unclear	 once	 again	 whether	 the	 US	 was	 our
principal	enemy	or	not.	If	it	was	not,	then	Russia
needed	 to	 build	 build	 an	 Army	 in	 which	 the
strategic	sector	would	be	minimised	and	its	main
focus	would	be	on	the	formation	of	professional,
well-knit	 armed	 forces	 capable	 of	 combat
operations	 along	 the	 borders	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.	In	this	case,	the	Army	would	become
an	 extension	 of	 the	 police	 or,	 say,	 the	 border
guards.	But,	in	reality,	this	idea	is	at	odds	with	the
logic	of	geopolitics.
Americans	are	always	ready	to	smile	and	to
talk	 about	 concessions,	 but	 they	 never	 change

their	positions	when	it	comes	to	strategy.	As	a
result,	tension	here	escalates	again,	not	between
the	supporters	and	the	opponents	of	a	professional
Army,	but	between	the	two	competing,	primary
definitions	 of	 Russia’s	 geopolitical	 function.	 I
think	 Putin	 himself	 has	 not	 yet	 arrived	 at	 a
conclusive	 decision	 on	 this	 issue,	 although	 his
position	is	gradually	becoming	more	outlined.
The	same	goes	for	NATO	 relations,	 Russian
membership	 being	 an	 occasional	 topic.	 In	 the
event	 it	 joins	 it	 (which	 is	 quite	 unrealistic),
Russia	 will	 destroy	 this	 organisation:	 our
membership	 in	 the	 North	Atlantic	 alliance	 will
radically	 change	 its	 structure	 and	 geopolitical
inclinations.	If	a	strong	Eurasian	nuclear	power
with	 its	 own	 explicit	 continental	 interests	 joins
this	 bloc,	 it	 will	 cancel	 the	 very	 notion	 of
‘Atlanticism’,	turning	the	alliance	into	something
completely	 different.	 In	 this	 case	 NATO,	 by
definition,	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 perform	 the

functions	 for	 which	 it	 was	 created	 in	 the	 first
place.	It	will	be	a	completely	different	strategic
union.	 Besides,	 Russia’s	 strategic	 and	 military
status	is	so	high	that	the	organisation	will	not	be
able	 to	 conduct	 the	 unified	 civilisational	 and
geostrategic	 policy	 that	 NATO	 is	 currently
following.	 Vladimir	 Putin	 has	 been	 taking
concrete	 and	 persistent	 steps	 in	 this	 direction
from	 the	 outset	 (for	 instance,	 by	 proposing	 to
create	an	all-European	missile	defence	system).
As	far	as	I	know,	such	amendment	to	the	current
model	of	geostrategic	relations	with	the	West	is
one	of	Putin’s	priorities	and	an	integral	part	of	his
entire	foreign	policy.	But	NATO	also	understands
perfectly	what	this	is	all	about.	In	my	opinion,	the
US	  is	  absolutely	  unprepared	  for	  such
transformations	 within	 the	 alliance,	 and	 will
agree	to	it	only	if	it	realises	its	own	fundamental
vulnerability.	This	is	why	we	should	seek	NATO
membership,	but	should	not	be	surprised	if	our

application	is	rejected:	we	are	not	dealing	with
idiots.	On	the	other	hand,	Russia	is	actively	trying
to	showcase	its	geopolitical	personality	to	Europe
and	 the	 US.	 This	 is	 entirely	 correct,	 and	 our
possible	participation,	in	any	form,	in	any	anti-
terrorist	 actions	 taken	 by	 the	 international
community	 must	 be	 backed	 by	 a	 number	 of
strategic	conditions	stipulated	by	Russia.	Overall,
our	 direct	 involvement	 with	 American	 anti-
terrorist	 actions	 is	 extremely	 undesirable	 and,
possibly,	even	disastrous.	But	other,	more	flexible
forms	 of	 Russia’s	 participation	 in	 combating
international	terrorism	should	by	all	means	also
be	backed	by	a	number	of	conditions,	in	particular
by	a	demand	to	stop	NATO’s	expansion.		
The	 Eurasian	 way	 is	 the	 future	 of	 Russia.
According	 to	 the	 Russian	 Public	 Opinion
Research	 Centre,	 71%	 of	 Russians	 believe	 that
Russia	 is	 an	 independent	 Eurasian,	 Orthodox
civilisation.	Putin	is	a	national	leader.	He	cannot

turn	 a	 blind	 eye	 to	 his	 people’s	 choice.	 He
inherited	a	difficult	legacy	and	cadres	which	are
unsuitable	 for	 the	 realisation	 of	 his	 historical
mission.	 But	 we	 shall	 overcome.	 The	 leader	 of
Russia-Eurasia	cannot	but	be	a	Eurasian.	This	is	a
political	axiom.

5.	Putin’s	Eurasian
Revolution
Vladimir	Putin	and	the
Conservative	Revolution
During	his	first	term,	President	Putin	desperately
and	persistently	tried	to	hint	at	the	agenda	that	he
was	going	to	propose	to	the	nation.	Many	wanted
him	to	speak	out	with	more	clarity	and	to	be	more
concrete,	 but	 Putin’s	 style	 tends	 to	 be	 more
general:	he	gives	us	an	idea	and	leaves	a	lot	of
room	for	interpretation.	But	gradually,	everything
seemed	to	come	together.	The	 enigmatic	 Putin,
silent,	 simultaneously	 frowning	 and	 smiling,
finally	 let	 us	 know	 that	 his	 presidential
programme	 would	 be	 defined	 by	 one	 simple
word:	conservatism.
So,	 during	 his	 two	 terms	 Putin	 ruled	 in	 the

vein	of	a	‘conservative	programme’	and	clearly
intends	to	continue	this	policy	into	his	third	term.
But	 what	 does	 ‘conservatism’	 mean	 in	 modern
Russia?
The	Essence	of	Conservatism
Conservatism	in	its	most	general	sense	means	a
positive	 attitude	 towards	 historical	 tradition.	 It
holds	up	the	political	and	social	history	of	a	state
as	 a	 role	 model,	 striving	 to	 preserve	 the
continuity	 of	 the	 people’s	 national	 and	 cultural
roots.	The	past	is	viewed	by	all	denominations	of
conservatism	 as	 a	 positive	 phenomenon.	 Not
everything	in	the	past	is	perceived	as	positive,	but
a	consistent	conservative	will	never	deliberately
tarnish	any	period	in	the	history	of	his	people	and
state.
Moreover,	 conservatism	 is	 based	 on	 the
premise	 that	 the	 people	 and	 the	 state	 have	 a
certain	 historical	mission,	 which	 can	 vary	 from

universalist	 religious	 messianism	 to	 humble
awareness	 of	 the	 importance	 of	 their	 national
identity.	The	present,	the	past	and	the	future	in
the	eyes	of	a	conservative	are	tied	together	in	a
single	 integral	 project	 striving	 toward	 a	 clear
national	 goal.	 In	 making	 any	 political	 or
economic	decision,	a	conservative	always	turns	to
the	past	and	ponders	the	future.	A	conservative
thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 landmarks	 and	 epochs,
disregarding	 quick	 profit.	 His	 temporal,
geographical,	and	value-related	horizon	is	always
broad.
A	 conservative	 is	 a	 dedicated	 bearer	 of
national	 culture	 and	 seeks	 to	 comply	 with	 its
norms.	 A	 conservative	 always	 over-exerts
himself:	from	mandatory	prayer	to	cold	showers
in	the	morning.	A	conservative	consistently	ranks
duty,	 honour,	 the	 public	 benefit,	 loyalty	 to
tradition,	and	his	good	reputation	over	comfort,
benefit,	profit	or	popularity.										

A	conservative	is	reserved	and	prefers	to	speak
prudently	 and	 thoughtfully.	 A	 conservative	 is
civil	and	always	has	an	extra	pair	of	glasses,	even
if	he	has	perfect	eyesight.	
A	conservative	is	unsettled	by	objective	reality
and	 carefully	 selects	 books	 for	 reading.	 A
conservative	never	considers	himself	as	such.
A	conservative	smiles,	turning	up	the	corners
of	his	mouth,	and	never	expresses	himself	with
his	hands.
Anyone	 who	 does	 not	 comply	 with	 these
requirements	is	not	a	proper	conservative,	he	is
just...
Fundamental	Conservatism
Conservatism	has	an	underlying	philosophy.	To
be	a	conservative	means	to	say	‘no’	to	what	we
have	now	and	to	express	one’s	disagreement	with
the	current	state	of	things.
There	is	fundamental	conservatism,	which	is

called	traditionalism.
Traditionalism	is	a	form	of	conservatism	that
argues	 that	 everything	 is	 bad	 in	 its	 entirety	 in
today’s	 world,	 not	 just	 in	 certain	 aspects.	 ‘The
idea	 of	 progress,	 technical	 development,
Descartes’	 subject-object	 dualism,	 Newton’s
watchmaker	argument,	contemporary	positivistic
science	and	the	education	based	on	it,	pedagogics,
and	what	we	call	modernism	and	postmodernism
—	they	are	all	bad.’	A	traditionalist	likes	only
what	 had	 existed	 prior	 to	 modernism.	 In	 the
twentieth	 century,	 when	 there	 seemed	 to	 be	 no
social	 platform	 left	 for	 such	 conservatism,	 a
constellation	 of	 thinkers	 and	 philosophers
appeared	out	of	nowhere	and	started	to	defend,
radically	 and	 consistently,	 the	 traditionalist
position:	René	Guénon,
[224]
	Julius	Evola,
[225]
	Titus
Burckhardt,
[226]
	Leopold	Ziegler
[227]
	and	all	those
known	 as	 traditionalists.	 They	 proposed	 a
programme	  of	  fundamental	  conservatism,

described	traditional	society	as	a	timeless	ideal,
and	the	contemporary	world	(modernism)	and	its
basic	 principles	 as	 a	 product	 of	 decline,
degradation,	 the	 mixing	 of	 castes,	 the
disintegration	of	hierarchy,	representing	a	shift	of
focus	 from	 the	 spiritual	 to	 the	 material,	 from
Heaven	 to	 Earth,	 and	 from	 the	 eternal	 to	 the
transient.	Fundamental	conservatives	exist	today
in	both	the	Orthodox	and	Catholic	milieus.	They
completely	 reject	 modernism	 and	 believe	 that
religious	laws	are	absolutely	relevant,	and	that	the
contemporary	 world	 and	 its	 values	 are	 an
embodiment	of	the	Antichrist,	and	which	cannot
offer	 anything	 good	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 These
tendencies	 are	 common	 among	 Russian	 Old
Believers.	There	is	still	a	Paraclete	Union	in	the
Urals	which	does	not	use	electric	lighting	because
it	is	‘the	light	of	Lucifer’,	and	they	use	only	pine
splinters	and	candles;	there	are	also	sects	which
strictly	prohibit	coffee.	When	a	group	of	young

people	 in	 eighteenth-century	 Russia	 started	 to
wear	chequered	trousers	in	accordance	with	the
current	fashions,	the	Fedosevans
[228]
	summoned	an
assembly	in	the	town	of	Kimry,	sometimes	called
the	 ‘trouser	 assembly’,	 and	 discussed	 whether
those	 wearing	 chequered	trousers	 should	 be
excommunicated.	 Part	 of	 the	 assembly	 insisted
that	they	be	separated	from	the	community	and
the	other	part	voted	against	it.
The	US	has	its	own	conservative	tradition	that
is	naturally	based	on	the	priorities	of	America’s
national	interests.	Marked	by	a	significant	degree
of	messianism	(‘the	American	civilisation	is	the
peak	of	human	history’),	American	conservatism
respects	 the	 past	 and	 strives	 to	 preserve	 and
strengthen	the	positions	of	its	great	country	in	the
future.	American	conservatives	profess	loyalty	to
patriotic	values	as	well	as	to	religious,	political,
social	 and	 cultural	 norms	 that	 were	 established
throughout	 the	 course	 of	 their	 historical

development.	 This	 is	 natural	 and,	 as	 a
consequence,	  American	  conservatism	  is
flourishing:	the	US	has	achieved	incredible	power
internationally,	 which	 makes	 its	 citizens
justifiably	 proud	 and	 convinced	 of	 the
righteousness	 of	 their	 ways.	 In	 America,
fundamental	 conservatism	 is	 professed	 by	 a
significant	share	of	the	Republican	electorate,	and
TV	 programmes	 which	 feature	 Protestant
fundamentalists	criticising	all	things	modern	and
postmodern	 and	 tearing	 them	 to	 shreds	 are
watched	by	millions	of	people...
But	 the	 direct	 emulation	 of	 ‘Republican’
American	conservatism	by	Russia	yields	absurd
results:	it	turns	out	that	what	is	to	be	‘conserved’
are	values	that	are	not	only	foreign	to	historical
and	 traditional	 Russia,	 but	 which	 are	 basically
absent	from	contemporary	Russian	society.
Russia	is	an	ancient	land-based	empire	with	a
strong	 collectivist	 spirit,	 traditionally	 tough

administrative	 rule	 and	 a	 very	 specific
messianism.	The	US	is	a	relatively	new	sea-based
entity,	 intentionally	 designed	 as	 a	 laboratory
experiment	for	the	introduction	of	‘progressivist’
bourgeois	 democratic	 principles	 that	 matured
among	ultra-Protestant	sects.	What	is	valued	in
the	American	civilisation	is	a	sin	and	a	disgrace
for	the	Russians.	What	they	respect	is	disgusting
to	us,	and	vice	versa.
Russia	was	moving	towards	the	East	and	the
US	was	moving	towards	the	West.	Yes,	they	have
won	and	we	have	lost.	They	proved	to	be	stronger.
But,	 according	 to	 our	 logic,	 God	 is	 not	 power,
God	 is	 the	 truth.	 This	 is	 what	 a	 proper	 and
consistent	Russian	conservatism	says.	Obviously,
American	conservatism	says	exactly	the	opposite.
Globalism	can	be	both	recognised	and	attacked
in	the	US	itself	(this	is	their	world	domination
project;	some	Americans	agree	with	it	and	some
do	not).	In	Russia,	globalism	was	imposed	on	us

from	 the	 outside.	 We	 can	 put	 up	 with	 it	 and
recognise	our	defeat,	and	join	the	American	value
system.	 This	 position	 is	 possible,	 as	 is
collaborationism.	But	it	would	be	the	opposite	of
conservatism.
All	 peoples	 have	 their	 own	 conservatism
because	 each	 nation	 develops	 its	 own	 value
system,	and	this	constitutes	its	national	identity.
The	cultural	outcome	of	American	history	does
not	have	anything	in	common	with	the	cultural
outcome	 of	 Russian	 history.	 A	 conservative	 is
always	loyal	to	his	traditions,	his	people	and	his
ideals	—	not	only	in	their	heyday,	but	also	when
they	are	desecrated	and	despised	by	all.
Liberal	Conservatism
The	second	type	of	conservatism	is	‘status	quo
conservatism’	 or	 liberal	 conservatism.	 It	 says
‘yes’	to	modernism	as	today’s	main	trend,	but	at
each	stage	of	the	trend’s	implementation	it	tries

to	slow	it	down:	‘Please,	slow	down,	let’s	not	do
it	 today,	 let’s	 postpone	 it.’	 The	 liberal
conservative	 Fukuyama	 initially	 concluded	 that
politics	 had	 disappeared	 and	 was	 about	 to	 be
replaced	 by	 the	 ‘global	 marketplace’	 where
nations,	 states,	 ethnic	 groups,	 cultures	 and
religions	would	vanish	(this	is	liberalism	in	its
purest	form),	but	then	he	decided	that	we	should
slow	down	and	introduce	postmodernism	quietly,
without	 revolutions.	 He	 wrote	 that	 it	 was
necessary	 to	 temporarily	 strengthen	 the	 nation-
states	(in	this	case,	what	he	is	proposing	is	liberal
conservatism).
A	 liberal	 conservative	 is	 afraid	 that	 the
accelerated	dismantling	of	modernism,	which	is
taking	 place	 within	 postmodernism,	 can	 release
pre-modernism.	For	instance,	the	former	Leftist
turned	liberal	Jürgen	Habermas
[229]
	is	afraid	that
postmodernism	 will	 destroy	 the	 subject,	 engulf
humanity	 in	 chaos,	 and	 bring	 back	 the	 creepy

shadows	of	tradition.
The	 bin	 Laden	 character,	 irrespective	 of
whether	he	actually	existed	or	was	invented	by
Hollywood,	 is	 a	 caricature	 of	 postmodernism
collapsing	into	pre-modernism.
Right-wing	Conservatism
If	 liberal	 conservatism	 is	 nonsensical	 and	 just
another	 ‘refuge	 of	 a	 scoundrel’	 (Samuel
Johnson),
[230]
	 Right-wing	 conservatism,	 on	 the
contrary,	 is	 quite	 acceptable	 and	 natural.	 In
contemporary	Russia,	a	Right-wing	conservative
is	 a	 person	 who	 seeks	 the	 revival	 of	 his
motherland’s	international	imperial	greatness,	the
nation’s	economic	prosperity	and	the	revival	of
the	moral	values	and	spirituality	of	the	people.	He
thinks	 that	 this	 aim	 can	 be	 reached	 through	 a
competent	 use	 of	 market	 mechanisms	 and	 the
system	of	religious,	monarchical,	and	centralist-
leaning	values.

Such	 Right-wing	 conservatism	 can	 focus	 on
cultural-political	 issues	 (the	 consolidation	 of
traditional	denominations,	the	revival	of	national
customs,	the	restoration	of	a	segment	of	social,
public	and	political	institutions)	or	on	economic
aspects.	When	it	comes	to	the	economy,	a	Right-
wing	conservative	project	must	logically	develop
in	line	with	the	theory	of	a	‘national	economy’,
summed	up	by	the	German	economist	Friedrich
List
[231]
	 and	 implemented	 in	 Russia	 by	 Count
Sergei	 Witte.
[232]
	 This	 project	 can	 be	 called
‘economic	 nationalism’.	 Its	 extreme	 formula	 is
roughly	as	follows:	an	absolutely	free	domestic
market	with	a	severe	customs	control	system	and
thorough	regulation	of	foreign	economic	activity
in	the	interests	of	domestic	entrepreneurship.
A	 national	 economy	 does	 not	 involve	 the
nationalisation	of	large	monopolies	but	insists	on
the	 consolidation	 of	 large	 businesses	 around
political	authorities	with	the	transparent	and	clear

aim	of	finding	a	collective	solution	to	facilitate
the	 nation’s	 mission,	 the	 strengthening	 of	 the
country	and	the	achievement	of	prosperity	for	all
of	the	nation’s	people.	It	can	be	achieved	via	a
certain	 ‘patriotic	 code’,	 which	 implies	 the
assumption	 of	 moral	 responsibility	 by	 national
businessmen	 before	 the	 country,	 people	 and
society.	This	model	in	today’s	political	spectrum
roughly	corresponds	to	what	is	usually	called	‘the
Right-wing	centre’.	It	seems	that	 Putin	 himself
prefers	the	‘Right-wing’	centre	of	conservatism	to
any	other	type	of	conservatism.
Left-wing	Conservatism
The	notion	‘Left	wing’	is	usually	not	associated
with	conservatism.	The	Left	wants	change	and	the
Right	 wants	 to	 conserve	 the	 existing	 state	 of
things.	But	in	Russia’s	political	history	the	public
sector,	which	is	related	to	the	‘Left-wing’	value
system,	 has	 always	 been	 extremely	 significant

and	developed,	and	the	communal	factor,	both	in
the	form	of	Orthodox	conciliarism
[233]
	and	Soviet
collectivism,	 had	 long	 become	 a	 dependable
political	 and	 economic	 tradition.	A	 meaningful
combination	of	socialism	and	conservatism	was
already	 evident	 in	 the	 Russian	narodniki
(populists)	of	the	nineteenth	century,	who	were
devoted	to	national	problems	and	strove	for	a	fair
distribution	 of	 material	 wealth.	 Left-wing
conservatism	also	existed	in	other	countries:	as
social	 Catholicism
[234]
	 in	 France	 and	 Latin
America,	 and	 as	 German	 National	 Bolshevism
(Niekisch,
[235]
	  Wolffheim,
[236]
	  Laufenberg,
[237]
etc.).	 A	 distinctive	 representative	 of	 social
conservatism	 is	 Georges	 Sorel,
[238]
	 who	 wrote
Reflections	 on	 Violence.
[239]
	 He	 argued	 that
Leftists	  and	  Rightists	  (monarchists	  and
Communists)	were	fighting	against	one	common
enemy:	the	bourgeoisie.	Left-wing	conservatism

is	close	to	the	Russian	National	Bolshevism	of	N.
Ustryalov,
[240]
	 who	 identified	 Russian	 national
myths	in	Left-wing	Marxist	ideology.
In	contemporary	Russian	politics,	social	(Left-
wing)	 conservatism	 is	 fully	 legitimate.	 Russian
Left-wing	conservatives	seek	to	preserve	Russia’s
civilisational	values,	strengthen	our	geopolitical
power	and	bring	about	a	national	revival.	Left-
wing	conservatives	believe	that	the	best	way	to
implement	 this	 mission	 is	 through	 the
nationalisation	 of	 mineral	 resources	 and	 large
private	 companies	 engaged	 in	 the	 export	 of
natural	 resources,	 as	 well	 as	 by	 increasing
government	 control	 in	 the	 spheres	 of	 energy,
transport,	communications,	and	so	on.	Such	social
conservatism	 can	 insist	 on	 the	 legitimacy	 and
natural	character	of	the	Soviet	approach,	viewing
it	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the	 general	 national	 dialectics.
Another	 trend	 is	 so-called	 social	 conservatism,
which	can	be	considered	as	a	sub-family	of	the

Conservative	 Revolution.	 Both	 Left-wing	 and
Right-wing	 conservatism,	 by	 definition,	 must
have	 a	 common	 ultimate	 aim:	 the	 revival	 of
statehood,	 the	 preservation	 of	 national	 identity,
the	international	rise	of	Russia,	and	loyalty	to	our
cultural	roots.	The	approaches	toward	achieving
this	common	goal,	however,	differ	 between	 the
two	schools	of	though.
Conservative	Revolution
There	is	yet	another,	and	very	interesting,	type	of
conservatism.	 It	 is	 usually	 referred	 to	 as	 the
Conservative	Revolution,	and	it	dialectically	links
conservatism	 with	 modernism.	 This	 trend	 was
adopted	by	Martin	Heidegger,	Ernst	and	Friedrich
Jünger,
[241]
	Carl	Schmitt,
[242]
	Oswald	Spengler,
[243]
Werner	Sombart,
[244]
	Othmar	Spann,
[245]
	Friedrich
Hielscher,
[246]
	Ernst	Niekisch,	and	others.
The	  philosophical	  paradigm	  of	  the
conservative	 revolutionary	 stems	 from	 the

general	 conservative	 view	 of	 the	 world	 as	 an
objective	process	of	degradation,	which	reaches
its	 peak	 with	 modernism	 (a	 view	 shared	 by
traditionalism).	 But,	 unlike	 the	 traditionalists,
conservative	revolutionaries	think:	why	does	God,
who	 created	 this	 world,	 ultimately	 turn	 a	 blind
eye	to	evil,	and	why	do	God’s	enemies	win?	One
might	 suspect	 that	 the	 beautiful	 Golden	 Age,
which	fundamental	conservatives	defend,	already
contained	 a	 gene	 that	 brought	 about	 this
degradation.	   Then	   the	   conservative
revolutionaries	  say	  to	  the	  fundamental
conservatives:	 ‘You	 propose	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the
state	 when	 man	 only	 suffered	 from	 the	 initial
symptoms	 of	 the	 illness,	 a	 hacking	 cough,	 and
talk	about	how	well-off	man	was	back	then,	when
today	 this	 same	 man	 is	 on	 his	 deathbed.	 You
merely	 contrast	 a	 coughing	 man	 with	 a	 dying
man.	 Conservative	 revolutionaries	 want	 to	 find
out	how	the	infection	itself	originated	and	why

the	 man	 started	 to	 cough...’	 ‘We	 believe’,	 the
conservative	revolutionaries	say,	‘in	God	and	in
Providence.	But	we	think	the	original	source,	God
Himself,	the	Divine	Source,	contains	the	intention
to	organise	this	eschatological	drama.’	With	this
vision,	 modernism	 acquires	 a	 paradoxical
character.	It	is	not	just	an	illness	of	today’s	world,
but	a	discovery	in	today’s	world	of	a	phenomenon
which	began	to	take	root	in	the	very	same	past
that	is	so	dear	to	traditionalists.	Modernism	is	not
improved	 as	 a	 result	 of	 this	 realisation	 by	 the
conservative	revolutionaries,	while	tradition	loses
its	decisive	positivity.
The	 basic	 formula	 of	 the	 Conservative
Revolutionary	Arthur	Moeller	van	den	Bruck	is,
‘The	 conservatives	 used	 to	 try	 to	 stop	 the
revolution,	but	now	we	must	lead	it.’	It	means
that	 in	 joining,	 modernism’s	 destructive
tendencies,	in	part	out	of	pragmatism,	one	must
identify	and	recognise	the	germ	that	served	as	the

initial	 cause	 of	 its	 destructive	 tendencies	 —
namely,	modernism	itself.	Then	the	conservative
must	 carefully	 and	 permanently	 root	 it	 out	 of
existence	 and,	 in	 doing	 so,	 bring	 about	 God’s
secret,	parallel,	additional,	and	subtle	design.	The
conservative	 revolutionaries	 want	 not	 only	 to
slow	time	down	as	do	liberal	conservatives	or	to
go	back	to	the	past	like	traditionalists,	but	to	tear
out	the	root	of	all	evil	in	the	world’s	fundamental
structure.
The	Conservative	Choice
Contemporary	 Russian	 conservatism	 must	 be
simultaneously	non-Communist	(the	Communist
dogma	has	always	denied	the	fact	that	the	Soviet
regime	was	a	continuation	of	tsarism	and	treated
recent	 democratic	 reforms	 in	 an	 extremely
negative	 light),	 non-liberal	 (liberalism	 is	 too
revolutionary	and	insists	on	a	radical	break	from
both	the	Soviet	past	and	the	tsarist	legacy),	and

non-monarchic	 (monarchism	 wants	 to	 exclude
both	the	Soviet	and	the	recent	liberal	democratic
periods	from	national	history).
The	peculiarity	of	Russian	political	life	in	the
twenty-first	century	is	that	its	main	stages	have
been	in	direct	and	severe	conceptual	opposition	to
each	other	and	succeeded	each	other	not	through
natural	 continuity,	 but	 through	 revolutions	 and
radical	disruptions.	This	seriously	challenges	the
formula	of	contemporary	Russian	conservatism:
the	 continuity	 and	 identity	 of	 Russia	 and	 the
Russian	people	are	not	plainly	visible	on	society’s
surface;	 in	 order	 to	 establish	 consistent
conservative	views,	one	must	make	an	effort	that
will	 raise	 us	 to	 the	 level	 of	 a	 new	 historical,
political,	   civilisational	   and	   national
consolidation.	    Contemporary	    Russian
conservatism	 is	 not	 a	 given,	 but	 a	 task	 to	 be
undertaken.
Consistent	  Russian	  conservatism	  must

combine	the	historical	and	geographical	layers	of
our	national	existence.	I	would	like	to	remind	you
that,	during	the	very	first	years	of	Soviet	rule,	the
Eurasianists	 insisted	 on	 the	 civilisational
continuity	of	the	USSR	in	relation	to	the	Russian
Empire.
Contemplating	   contemporary	   Russian
conservatism	  is	  basically	  contemplating
Eurasianism,	 which	 is	 a	 synthesis	 of	 Russian
political	 history	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 unique
geopolitical	 and	 civilisational	 methodology.
Russia,	viewed	as	Eurasia,	reveals	its	permanent
essence	 and	 its	 historical	 identity	 —	 from	 the
mosaic	 of	 Slavic,	 Turkic	 and	 Ugrian	 tribes
through	Kievan	Rus’
[247]
	and	Muscovy	to	the	great
continental	empire,	first	‘white’	and	then	‘red’,	to
today’s	 democratic	 Russia,	 which	 is	 a	 little
indecisive	but	is	now	pulling	herself	together	for
a	new	historical	leap.
I	am	convinced	that	political	history	will	very

soon	force	us	clarify	our	positions	and	polish	our
rhetoric	 to	 make	 it	 more	 precise.	 We	 have	 no
choice	 but	 conservatism:	 we	 will	 be	 pushed
towards	 it	from	 the	 outside,	 as	 well	 as	 from
within.	But	what	shall	we	do	with	the	spirit	of
revolution,	the	will,	the	blazing	flame	of	rebellion
which	secretly	languishes	in	the	Russian	heart	and
disturbs	 our	 sleep,	 inviting	 us	 to	 follow	 it	 to
faraway	lands?	I	think	that	we	should	invest	our
continental	 strength	 in	 a	 new	 conservative
project.	 And	 let	 it	 be	 the	 new	 edition	 of	 our
Revolution,	 the	 Conservative	 Revolution,	 the
National	 Revolution	 in	 the	 name	 of	 a	 big
dream...		
Putin,	Conservatism	and	the
Siloviki
The	basic	paradigm	of	Putin	and	his	supporters	is,
I	think,	a	universal	conservatism,	which	includes
everything	from	the	liberally	enlightened	to	the

social	 and	 fundamental	 forms	 of	 conservatism.
The	alternatives	are	liberalism	and	Atlanticism,
which	have	been	held	over	from	earlier	times	in
the	 form	 of	 some	 of	 the	 personnel	 among	 the
presidential	 administration	 and	 its	 experts	 and
advisors.	 Putin	 is	 personally	 a	 supporter	 of	 the
idea	of	economic	and	social	mobilisation	for	the
sake	  of	  strengthening	  Russia’s	  national
sovereignty.	 It	 can	 be	 referred	 to	 as	 ‘active
conservatism’,	‘radical	conservatism’	and	even	a
call	 for	 a	 conservative	 revolution.	 Putin	 would
like	to	give	conservatism	some	consistency	and
political	resilience.	This	movement	is	noticeably
slowing	 down	 due	 to	 the	 unwillingness	 and
passive	attitude	of	state	officials,	centrist	parties,
and	 possibly	 even	 the	 masses;	 the	 policy	 is
dampened	by	an	entourage	that	blunts	its	vector.
There	is	no	intellectually	concentrated	focus,	no
adequate	institutions,	and	no	political	instruments
capable	of	undertaking	it.	This	is	the	reason	many

of	 Putin’s	 speeches	 are	 passively	 conservative,
hinting	 only	 at	 achieving	 satisfaction	 and
preserving	 the	 status	 quo.	 This	 is	 the	 principal
contradiction	of	Putin	and	his	rule:	subjectively
Putin	realises	and	recognises	the	need	for	active
conservative	measures	to	drag	the	country	out	of
stagnation,	 but	 he	 cannot	 properly	 implement
such	measures.	There	is	ongoing	passive	sabotage
of	 Putin’s	 initiatives	 by	 members	 of	 the
President’s	closest	entourage.
The	 second	 source	 of	 resistance	 is	 the
oligarchs.	 They	 do	 not	 see	 the	 necessity	 of
strengthening	the	national	administration	and	are
quite	satisfied	with	the	status	quo.	They	are	only
interested	 either	 in	 subduing	 conservatism,
stripping	 it	 of	 ideology	 and	 deconstructing	 it
(Pyotr	Aven	and	Alfa-Bank),
[248]
	or	in	a	gradual
transition	to	liberalism.
The	third	source	is	the	diehard	liberals.	They
are	 few	 and	 their	 paladin	 is	 Anatoly	 Chubais,

whose	 primary	 focus	 is	 the	 economy	 and
administration	 rather	 than	 ideology.	 That	 said,
Chubais	 does	 not,	 in	 fact,	 disagree	 with	 the
official	course;	he	merely	ignores	it	in	a	friendly
manner,	remaining	loyal	to	the	authorities.
But	 one	 cannot	 rule	 out	 the	 possibility	 of	 a
repeat	 privatisation	 of	 major	 holdings,	 such	 as
that	which	was	carried	out	in	the	1990s.	This	re-
privatisation	 phenomenon	 is	 practiced	 by	 many
capitalist	 countries,	 where	 the	 role	 of	 the	 state
and	 the	 administrative	 institutions	 in	 the
acquisition	 of	 property	 is	 very	 significant.	 The
bureaucracy	rotates	and	new	greedy	civil	servants
appear,	 who	 were	 once	 corrupted	 and	 are	 now
begging	for	more,	and	the	owners	think	that	they
have	already	paid	in	full.	The	conditions	for	a	re-
privatisation	 in	 Russia	 are	 maturing.	 Legally	 it
can	be	arranged	in	any	way	necessary	and	it	can
be	 accomplished	 politically	 as	 an	 intermediate
stage	of	re-nationalisation	stage	or	disguised	as

patriotism.
The	first	scenario	would	be	the	nationalisation
of	 natural	 resources,	 with	 a	 subsequent	 re-
privatisation	 disguised	 as	 a	 change	 in
management	 structure.	 The	 second	 scenario
would	be	a	public	demonstration	of	the	oligarchs’
unpatriotic	 stance	 (i.e.,	 the	 purchase	 of	 an
expensive	yacht	or	a	foreign	football	club)	with
subsequent	legal	and	criminal	persecution	fuelled
by	the	people’s	anger.	Then	the	property	will	find
a	new,	patriotic	owner:	the	management	will	not
be	improved,	the	civil	servants	will	be	satisfied,
the	people	will	be	subdued	for	a	time;	some	will
gain,	 some	 will	 lose,	 and	 somebody	 will	 go	 to
jail.
The	 law	 enforcement	 agencies	 are	 now
promoting	 Putin’s	 initial	 strategy	 aimed	 at
putting	the	country	in	order.	These	agencies	play
a	 very	 practical	 role	 in	 Russian	 society.	 The
technology	that	is	used	for	the	management	of	the

enforcement	agencies	is	obsolete;	they	still	use
things	 like	 IBM	 386	 computers.
[249]
	 The
enforcement	 agencies	 respond	 very	 weakly	 to
Vladimir	Putin,	and	the	entire	system	constantly
undergoes	clearly	visible	glitches.	The	fact	that
there	is	a	gap	between	a	President’s	task	and	the
quality	 and	 speed	 of	 its	 execution	 is	 not
surprising.	As	 far	 as	 the	 prosecutor’s	 office	 is
concerned,	this	is	quite	normal.	Russia	has	never
been	 and	 will	 hardly	 become	 a	 nomocratic
society.	The	notion	of	‘the	truth’	is	much	more
important	 that	 the	 notion	 of	 the	 ‘law’,	 and	 the
truth	 we	 adhere	 to	 is	 the	 Tsar’s	 truth.	 The
President	(the	Tsar,	or	the	General	Secretary)
[250]
in	a	country	like	Russia	is	playing	and	will	always
play	the	central	role	for	the	enforcement	agencies.
Vladimir	Putin	and	the	Empire
‘Russian	 leaders,	 particularly	 Prime	 Minister

Vladimir	 Putin,	 want	 to	 resurrect	 the	 Russian
Empire,’	said	the	American	Secretary	of	Defence,
Robert	 Gates.	 As	 Gates	 puts	 it,	 these
‘imperialistic	 intentions	 obstruct	 US-Russian
relations’.	The	Secretary	of	Defence	also	believes
that	 these	 ‘imperialistic	 intentions’	 are	 more
characteristic	 of	 Putin	 than	 of	 Medvedev.	 It	 is
Putin	who	is	doing	his	best	to	make	Russia	the
main	player	in	the	international	arena	—	a	fact
that	 greatly	 worries	 the	 US.	 ‘Are	 the	 Russians
condemned	 to	 yet	 another	 attempt	 to	 build	 an
empire?’	asks	Geoffrey	Hosking,	a	Professor	at
University	 College	 London,	 in	 his	 book	Rulers
and	Victims:	The	Russians	in	the	Soviet	Union.
[251]
This	worries	the	British	as	well:	Hosking	asks,
‘What	 exactly	 will	 the	 Russians	 choose:	 the
present	state	of	affairs,	where	it	has	lost	parts	of
its	territory	lost,	or	a	new	empire?’
Again:	Who	are	You,	Mr	Putin?

This	question,	posed	at	the	beginning	of	Putin’s
career,	was	formulated	during	the	transmutation
of	contemporary	Russia’s	political	language	from
modernism	 into	 postmodernism.	 The	 classical
modernism	 of	 the	 Enlightenment	 views	 Putin
more	 as	 a	 human	 being,	 a	 personality	 with
particular	 features,	 and	 less	 as	 a	 politician.	 In
postmodernism,	a	personality	is	an	empty	spot	—
fragments	of	a	discourse	in	a	linguistic	context.
Vladimir	 Putin’s	 image	 stems	 not	 from
knowledge	 of	 him	 or	 from	 an	 analysis	 of	 his
actions,	but	from	language	games.
When	 people	 who	 know	 our	 President	 well
hear	what	is	said	about	Putin	in	the	West,	they
fall	out	of	their	chairs.	This	happens	because	the
Putin	the	West	has	imagined	does	not	exist.	There
are	reports	and	language	games	about	Putin	being
created	in	both	Russia	and	Europe,	and	the	ugly
picture	that	the	West	is	given	of	him	has	nothing
at	all	to	do	with	our	President.	Westerners	sees

Putin	as	a	‘political	dwarf’	without	any	ideology,
a	protégé	of	the	most	reactionary	circles	and	of
the	most	horrible	secret	services;	a	person	neither
with	 any	 political	 future	 nor	 any	 respect	 for
democracy.	 We,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 deal	 with
another	Putin.	He	is	a	product	of	our	ceremonial,
mostly	officious	style.
Putin	as	the	Symbol	of	Empire-building
The	new,	large	Russia	to	be	resurrected	within	the
Eurasian	 space	 is	 an	 idea	 of	 a	 new	 sovereign
empire.	It	is	not	Soviet,	because	that	ideology	is
dead,	but	not	Russian	either,	because	we	have	no
common	religious	vector	here.	At	the	new	stage
Eurasianism	 proposes	 the	 resurrection	 of	 the
Large	 Eurasian	 Space	 in	 place	 of	 the	 former
Russian	 Empire	 and	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 This
project	 is	 in	 strong	 opposition	 to	 Russian
Westernists	 as	 well	 as	Atlanticists.	 Putin	 came
out	 of	 the	 Atlanticist	 regime	 of	 Yeltsin,	 but

completely	reversed	Yeltsin’s	policy	in	less	than
6	 years.	 At	 the	 outset,	 the	 main	 idea	 was	 to
integrate	Russia	into	the	Western	world	in	order
to	 become,	 as	 they	 said,	 ‘a	 normal	 country’.
Today’s	 norm	 for	 our	 political	 establishment,
apart	from	ultra-marginal	scum,	is	another	idea:
Russia	 is	 a	 great	 country,	 a	 country	 re-
establishing	its	universal	significance	and	leading
an	 independent	 policy	 free	 from	 globalist
pressure	 and	 the	 unipolar	 world.	 This	 is	 a
geopolitical	 programme	 of	 empire-building.
Eurasianism	 today	 opposes	 two	 things:	 liberal-
democratic	Westernism	and	narrow	nationalism,
the	 latter	 of	 which	 presents	 Russia	 as	 a	 mono-
national	 state.	 Putin’s	 presidential	 policy	 is
directed	by	this	Eurasian	code.
Jean	Parvulesco:	‘This	Simply	Cannot
Be...’
What	 is	 especially	 striking	 about	 the	 French

visionary	writer	Jean	Parvulesco,	known	for	his
extravagant	fantasies,	is	that	all	of	his	writings
tend	to	come	true	over	time.	I	read	the	articles
that	he	wrote	between	1976-1979	in	the	Italian
magazine	Orion,	where	he	described	a	situation
that	actually	came	about	in	Russia	in	1991-1993.
It	 described	 the	 ‘Red-Browns’,	 the	 union	 of
Communists	 and	 nationalists,	 as	 well	 as	 the
liberal	 institutions	 which	 would	 unite	 with	 the
West	and	destroy	the	great	Soviet	Union.	At	the
time,	many	people	who	read	his	articles	said	that
Parvulesco	 was	 insane.	 Brezhnevism	 was
rampant,	and	the	Soviet	bloc	seemed	impervious.
Even	 we,	 his	 friends,	 were	 saying:	 ‘This	 just
cannot	be,	Jean!		‘This	is	nonsense!’	His	answer
was	‘Just	wait,	Alexander...’
In	 his	 book	Putin	 and	 the	 Eurasian	 Empire,
now	published	in	Russia,	Parvulesco	argued	that
there	 were	 people	 in	 the	 Russian	 military	 and
secret	 service	 who	 based	 their	 work	 on	 a

geopolitical	 perspective	 and	 who	 nurtured	 the
idea	of	resurrecting	the	Empire	on	a	continental
scale.	He	predicted	that,	sooner	or	later,	a	man
would	 emerge	 from	 the	 secret	 service	 and
implement	 the	 idea	 of	 restoring	 the	 imperial
geopolitical	  potential	  of	  Russia	  beyond
Communist	ideology.	He	would	be	guided	by	the
values	 ingrained	 in	 the	 very	 core	 of	 Russian
history.	 He	 would	 revive	 Orthodoxy,	 restore
national	identity	and	bring	Russia	back	to	its	pre-
Communist	values.	Parvulesco	wrote	this	in	the
1970s,	when	nobody	could	even	imagine	it,	and
20	years	later	Putin	emerged.	Parvulesco	singled
him	out	immediately:	‘He	is	a	man	of	destiny,
I’ve	always	written	about	him.	I	wrote	about	him
long	before	I	knew	his	name.’
In	Parvulesco’s	writing,	Putin	does	not	exist
merely	as	a	person.	There	is	the	Eurasian	Empire,
the	 ‘dogmatic	 course’,	 and	 the	 building	 of	 the
Eurasian	Empire	with	Putin	as	an	instrument	of

its	creation.
Whether	or	not	Putin	was	chosen	in	the	secret
corridors	 of	 the	 Russian	 secret	 service	 to
implement	 this	 empire-building	 feat	 remains	 a
mystery.	 This	 cannot	 be	 either	 refuted	 or
confirmed.	The	‘Vladimir	Putin	and	the	Eurasian
Empire’	project	is	not	just	the	past,	the	present
and	the	future.	A	visionary	acts	in	a	space	where
the	 past	 and	 future	 coexist.	 Many	 biblical
prophets	describe	the	design	of	eternity,	and	the
non-visionary,	non-prophetic	Parvulesco	does	the
same	thing.
The	Eurasian	Empire	is	Integrated	into	the
Dogmatic	Course	of	Events
Parvulesco	paints	a	striking	picture,	very	different
from	 both	 official	 Russian	 perceptions	 and	 the
Western	ideas	of	Putin.	He	makes	Putin	part	of
global	 history	 on	 a	 par	 with	 figures	 like
Alexander	the	Great,	Napoleon,	de	Gaulle,	Stalin,

Hitler,	 Lenin,	 the	 secret	 services	 and	 great
conquests.	 Parvulesco	 notices	 the	 smallest
details:	Putin’s	chance	phrase	or	a	gesture	made
during	a	foreign	trip	—	all	that	is	sufficient	for	a
postmodern	 insight	 into	 the	 dialectics	 of	 the
Empire.
What	Putin	and	his	entourage	think	about	this
surprising	 and	 attractive	 image	 of	 a	 historical
person	 is	 less	 important	 than	 the	 way	 we
understand	 the	 essence	 and	 contexts	 of	 the
imperial	  project	  within	  which	  such
transformations	 are	 possible.	 As	 the	 German
Romantic	Novalis
[252]
	 once	 said,	 we	 learn	 more
about	 the	 essence	 of	 ancient	 times	 from	 fairy
tales	 than	 from	 detailed	 historical	 chronicles.
Only	totally	inept	and	mentally	deficient	people,
like	 the	 early	 Ludwig	 Wittgenstein	 or	 the
positivists,	 can	 argue	 that	 a	 researcher	 needs
atomic	 facts.
[253]
	 There	 are	 no	 such	 facts:	 they
have	been	searched	for	by	people	more	dedicated

than	 these	 contemporary	 Russian	 philistines,
indeed	by	piercing	and	acute	minds.	Putin	as	an
actual	 person	 simply	 does	 not	 exist,	 and	 the
version	 proposed	 by	 Jean	 Parvulesco	 deserves
serious	 contemplation	 because	 intellectually,
stylistically	 and	 visually	 it	 revolves	 around	 the
very	 metaphysics	 of	 our	 Large	 Space	 and	 our
great	people.	This	is	why	‘Putin	as	the	builder	of
the	great	Eurasian	empire’	is	the	most	correct	and
realistic	understanding	of	his	mission,	while	all
the	junk	that	is	churned	out	both	against	him	and
in	his	support	will	soon	rot	away.	Putin	as	the
empire-builder	 will	 survive,	 even	 if	 he	 himself
rejects	 this	 image.	 He	 will	 still	 constitute	 the
portrait	of	our	epoch,	not	only	of	Putin	himself
but	of	Russia.	The	Eurasian	Empire	is	inevitably
integrated	in	the	dogmatic	course	of	things.	This
is	 understood	 by	 Robert	 Gates	 and	 Geoffrey
Hosking,	as	well	as	by	the	entire	Western	elite
that	rules	the	contemporary	world.	The	Eurasian

Empire	was,	is	and	always	will	be,	and	Putin	is
obviously	connected	with	it.
Eurasianism	as	the	New	President’s
Ideology
The	Eurasian	ideology	is	in	perfect	accord	with
the	historical	mission	facing	Vladimir	Putin.	The
main	problems	of	the	current	political	situation
are	 absence	 of	 a	 genuine	 consolidation	 of	 the
political	class	around	Putin,	the	uncertainty	of	the
centrist	 parties’	 positions,	 the	 willingness	 of
certain	 high-ranking	 officials	 to	 grab	 the
opportunity	 to	 directly	 confront	 the	 President
with	the	support	of	some	important	forces	in	the
media	and	intelligentsia,	and	the	preservation	of
an	anti-Russian	stance	in	the	European	Union	and
certain	Republican	circles	in	the	US.
The	 ‘inertial’	 (sluggish)	 scenario	 in	 the
development	 of	 the	 political	 situation	 today,
specifically	the	preservation	of	key	tendencies	(an

apparent	stability	and	the	status	quo)	is	unlikely.
One	 should	 bear	 in	 mind	 some	 additional
scenarios.	Eurasianism	is	especially	optimal	as	an
ideology	 for	 the	 President	 to	 use	 in	 a	 critical
situation.	Eurasianism	will	add	substance	to	the
President’s	political	position	—	a	substance	that
was	outlined	at	the	beginning	of	his	first	term,	but
then	 postponed,	 effaced	 and	 replaced	 by	 tricks
and	 superficial	 shows	 staged	 by	 political
strategists.
Eurasianism	will	infuse	a	patriotic	 policy	 (a
national	 idea)	 with	 active	 political	 content.
Eurasianism	 mobilises	 not	 only	 the	 mostly
passive	forces	that	sympathise	with	the	cause	of
strengthening	the	Russian	statehood	(the	Russian
majority,	civil	servants,	and	the	masses),	but	also
the	active	layers	of	society	that	have	a	neutral	or
even	 negative	 attitude	 towards	 this	 project
(national	  and	  religious	  minorities,	  the
intelligentsia,	business	magnates).	Small	people

fighting	for	a	great	Russia!
Eurasianism	  proposes	  an	  unambiguous
scenario	for	an	international	strategy:	the	middle
path	between	globalisation	and	isolationism;	it	is
‘partial	 globalisation’	 or	 the	 ‘globalisation	 of
Large	  Spaces.’	  This	  model	  implies	  a
differentiating	 attitude	 towards	 other	 ‘Large
Spaces’:	 European,	 American,	 Pacific,	 Arabic.
This	 allows	 Russia	 to	 accumulate	 its	 internal
potential	 and	 skilfully	 manoeuvre	 between	 the
interests	of	other	geopolitical	poles	for	her	own
benefit.
Eurasianism	 involves	 infusing	 all	 the	 pro-
presidential	forces	and,	more	broadly,	all	layers
of	society	that	realise	their	personal	dependency
on	the	cause	of	strengthening	the	Russian	state
with	political	content.
The	 potential	 size	 of	 the	 electorate	 that
supports	 Putin	 as	 he	 is	 and	 which	 will	 be
especially	eager	to	support	a	Eurasian	President	is

much	broader	than	those	ideologically	lacklustre,
artificial	partisan	entities	with	little	potential	for
mobilisation	and	clumsy	politics.	Besides,	proper
handling	of	the	Eurasian	ideology	will	give	the
new	President	the	possibility	to	choose	a	certain
part	 of	 the	 national	 and	 socially-oriented
electorate,	which	will	give	serious	support	to	the
political	 (Left-wing)	 opposition	 (the	 new
President	will	not	risk	losing	the	support	of	the
Right-wing	sector	due	to	the	direct	dependence	on
the	 Kremlin	 of	 some	 of	 these	 forces	 and	 the
insignificant	 political	 share	 possessed	 by	 this
sector	as	a	whole).
Eurasianism	 foresees	 an	 ideological	 base	 to
conduct	 a	 ‘crusade’	 against	 extremism	 and
various	terrorist	ideologies	—	radical	Islamism,
national	separatism,	superpower	chauvinism	and
social	  (Left-wing)	  radicalism.	  Besides,
Eurasianism	 not	 only	 fundamentally	 and
substantively	 validates	 the	 necessity	 of	 strong

ideological	opposition	to	such	things,	but	offers	a
positive	 alternative	 in	 the	 form	 of	 the	 values
accepted	 and	 defended	 by	 Eurasianism	 itself:
traditional	Islam,	the	theory	of	the	rights	of	the
peoples	and	of	ethnocultural	autonomies	(without
prospective	 political	 segregation),	 geopolitical
Eurasian	 patriotism,	 and	 a	 moderate,	 socially-
oriented	economic	system.	Eurasianism	not	only
destroys	 the	 opponent	 ideologically,	 it	 also
attracts	 the	 hesitant	 masses,	 which	 otherwise
might	 stand	 in	 opposition	 to	 Russian	 statehood
and	the	new	President.
Eurasianism	 has	 its	 own	 formula	 for	 all	 the
principal	economic	strata	of	Russian	society.	In
the	electoral	sense,	it	appeals	to	the	‘dispossessed
majority’	—	to	the	working	class	that	makes	up
the	 majority	 of	 voting	 Russians.	 Here	 social
rhetoric	 comes	 to	 the	 forefront	 (social	 justice,
nationalisation	 of	 natural	 resources	 rent,	 etc.).
The	 cadres	 of	 Eurasianism	 are	 formed,	 in

contrast,	 from	 representatives	 of	 medium-size
and	small	businesses	who	have	an	adequate	share
of	efficient	and	energetic	civil	servants	(capable
of	mobilisation).	For	powerful	Russian	magnates,
Eurasianism	proposes	to	heighten	their	awareness
of	 the	 direct	 connection	 between	 their	 business
structures	and	the	geopolitical	destiny	of	Russian
statehood	 itself	 (which	 is	 typical	 of	 all	 large
national	and	transnational	companies	in	the	US,
Europe,	Japan,	etc.).	Thus,	the	Eurasian	economy
model	 satisfies	 the	 demand	 of	 the	 masses	 for
social	justice,	encourages	middle	class	initiatives,
and	 inspires	 geopolitical	 responsibility	 in	 the
magnates.
Eurasianism	today	is	the	ideological	basis	of
the	Eurasian	political	party,	which	will	soon	be
restored.	This	party	does	not	have	opportunistic
ambitions	and	does	not	aim	to	be	in	competition
with	other	political-partisan	projects.	The	Eurasia
Party
[254]
	should	be	viewed	not	as	an	alternative	to

the	other	pro-presidential	parties	but	as	a	political
and	ideological	laboratory	for	the	development	of
a	 national	 strategy	 and	 ideology	 for	 the	 new
President.	Thus,	Eurasianism	can	evolve	quickly
from	a	party	ideology	via	a	presidential	ideology
to	an	ideology	of	the	state.
Putin	and	Eurasian	Integration
The	processes	of	integration	in	the	territory	of	the
former	Soviet	Union	have	always	been	a	painful
subject	for	Russian	politicians.	After	the	creation
of	an	amorphous	group	with	uncertain	functions
and	the	equally	obscure	name	‘Commonwealth	of
Independent	States’	in	the	place	of	the	USSR,	no
serious	 developments	 towards	 a	 large-scale
integration	took	place	in	the	former	USSR.	This
was	not	due	to	the	unwillingness	of	the	leaders	of
the	newly	formed	states:	some	of	them,	notably
Kazakhstan’s	 President	 Nursultan	 Nazarbayev,
were	actively	engaged	in	the	development	of	the

economic	 and	 political	 integration	 of	 the	 CIS
countries.	In	the	1990s,	Belarus’	leaders	showed
an	acute	interest	in	integration.	The	reason	for	the
slowing	down	of	the	integration	projects	in	the
post-Soviet	space	lies	in	the	unwillingness	of	the
Russian	 leaders	 themselves	 to	 deal	 with	 this
problem.
Throughout	the	1990s,	Russian	leaders,	during
those	rare	moments	when	they	were	capable	of
intellectual	 activity,	 thought	 that	 help	 would
come	from	abroad,	that	Russia	would	fuse	into
the	 family	 of	 advanced	 democratic	 nations	 and
would	 live	 its	 happy,	 fair	 bourgeois	 life.	 The
awakening	 came	 in	 the	 late	 1990s,	 when,
following	 the	 bombing	 of	 Yugoslavia	 and	 the
start	of	the	second	Chechnya	campaign,	a	sense	of
understanding	dawned	on	the	existing	elite:	if	the
West	is	ever	going	to	stomach	Russia,	it	will	do
so	only	piece	by	piece.	The	threat	of	our	country’s
disintegration	not	only	forced	them	to	strengthen

the	 ‘vertical	 power,’	 but	 to	 engage	 in	 foreign
relations	 in	 earnest,	 primarily	 with	 the	 CIS.	 It
turned	 out	 that	 while	 Russia	 was	 content	 to
engage	in	bilateral	negotiations	with	Belarus,	the
issues	 of	 multilateral	 CIS	 integration	 were
already	 being	 tackled	 by	 Washington,	 which
established	 organisations	 such	 as	 the	 GUAM
Organisation	 for	 Democracy	 and	 Economic
Development.
[255]
Vladimir	Putin	was	the	first	to	realise	that	our
previous	course	was	headed	towards	a	dead	end.	It
was	during	Putin’s	presidency	that	Russia	chose
the	 path	 towards	 CIS	 integration	 (economic,
military	 and	 political,	 from	 the	 creation	 of
EurAsEC	 to	 the	 negotiations	 regarding	 the
creation	of	a	union	with	Belarus).	Today	it	is	hard
to	 imagine	 Russia’s	 foreign	 policy	 and	 global
international	 relations	 in	 general	 without	 such
organisations	 as	 the	 Collective	 Security	 Treaty
Organisation	(CSTO),
[256]
	the	Eurasian	Economic

Community	  (EurAsEC),	  the	  Shanghai
Cooperation	 Organisation	 (SCO)
[257]
	 and	 the
Common	Free	Market	Zone	(CFMZ).
[258]
	All	 of
these	 organisations	 were	 established	 during
Putin’s	 presidency.	 Besides,	 the	 role	 of	 Russia,
Kazakhstan	 and	 Belarus	 as	 the	 three	 staples	 of
Eurasian	integration	in	the	CIS	territory	is	due,	in
no	 small	 part,	 to	 the	 personal	 confidential
relations	 between	 Vladimir	 Putin,	 Nursultan
Nazarbayev	 and	 Alexander	 Lukashenko.	 The
consequence	 of	 these	 confidential	 relations	 was
the	fact	that	the	degree	of	cooperation	regarding
integration	between	the	three	countries	is	fairly
high.	 As	 a	 result,	 Vladimir	 Putin	 resolved	 to
create	 the	 Customs	 Union	 in	 2006,	 which
included	all	three	countries	within	the	EurAsEC.
Allow	 me	 to	 be	 straightforward:	 without
Putin’s	 participation,	 further	 integration	 would
have	been	problematic.	For	example,	integration
suffered	a	blow	with	Gazprom’s	sanctions	against

Belarus,	 which	 were	 aimed	 at	 raising	 the	 gas
prices	for	an	allied	nation,	just	as	they	were	raised
for	the	then	hostile,	‘orange’	Ukraine.	Kazakhstan
would	not	want	to	experience	such	blows	either:
after	 the	 signing	 of	 the	 agreement	 on	 the
construction	 of	 the	 Caspian	 Coastal	 Pipeline,
Kazakhstan	will	deliver	its	gas	to	Europe	via	a
Gazprom	pipeline	system	and	will	be	dependent
on	 the	 prices	 set	 by	 this	 company.	 Nazarbayev
would	prefer	to	deal	with	a	man	who	could,	if
necessary,	clamp	down	on	the	gas	behemoth	in
the	interests	of	Russia	and	the	common	interests
of	 the	 Customs	 Union	 and	 EurAsEC.	 The	 only
way	we	could	reach	a	mutual	understanding	on
this	 issue	 with	 the	 majority	 of	 CIS	 countries,
primarily	Belarus	and	Kazakhstan,	is	by	putting
the	 integration	 into	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 person	 like
Vladimir	Putin.
Kazakhstan	 resolved	 to	 sign	 the	 Caspian
Coastal	Pipeline	construction	agreement,	binding

itself	to	Gazprom	purchase	prices	solely	based	on
the	belief	that	unification	processes	of	the	post-
Soviet	space,	which	includes,	inter	alia,	the	fuel
transportation	 issue,	 will	 be	 implemented	 by
Putin.	The	actions	of	Putin,	as	well	as	of	Russian
leaders	 in	 general	 (in	 particular	 the	 Foreign
Ministry),	have	recently	confirmed	that	Putin	will
play	 a	 crucial	 role	 in	 the	 process	 of	 intensive
Eurasian	integration.
Vladimir	 Putin’s	 landmark	 article	 about	 the
creation	of	the	Eurasian	Union	was	published	on	3
October	2011	in	the	newspaper	Izvestija.
[259]
	The
theses	 proposed	 by	 Putin	 implied	 that	 the
Eurasian	Union,	similar	to	the	European	Union,
will	 be	 a	 single	 economic	 space	 in	 which
immigration	and	border	barriers	will	be	removed
between	them.	The	steps	taken	by	Putin	after	the
publication	 of	 his	 article	 demonstrate	 that	 this
was	not	merely	words.	The	fact	that	he	started	to
consistently	 implement	 the	 projects	 of	 the

Customs	Union,	the	creation	of	a	free	economic
zone	 in	 the	 CIS	 and	 so	 on,	 show	 that	 we	 are
dealing	with	a	strategy	and	a	programme.			
The	Project	of	Putin’s	Return:	The
Multipolar	World
The	Eurasian	Union	is	not	merely	an	economic
initiative,	 although	 Putin	 stresses	 its	 economic
aspect.	If	it	were	solely	about	the	economy,	why
not	 stop	 at	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 EurAsEC,	 the
Common	 Free	 Market	 Zone	 or	 the	 Customs
Union?	 Putin	 talks	 about	 creating	 a	 Eurasian
Union,	 which	 hints	 at	 something	 much	 more
expansive.	  Since	  Kazakhstan’s	  president
Nazarbayev	developed	this	model,	and	since	our
Eurasian	 Movement	 has	 been	 engaged	 in	 the
issues	of	Eurasian	integration	and	the	creation	of
the	Eurasian	Union	for	many	years,	I	can	say	with
confidence	that	this	is	more	than	just	an	economic
project:	this	is	a	political	strategy,.	and	Putin	has

set	out	to	implement	it.	If	Medvedev	started	his
presidency	with	a	project	of	modernisation,	Putin
marked	 his	 comeback	 with	 the	 creation	 of	 the
Eurasian	Union.
What	is	the	Eurasian	Union?	It	is,	in	effect,	a
political	 philosophy	 built	 around	 three	 main
principles	which	form	its	cores.	The	first	core	is
the	necessity	of	the	construction	of	a	multipolar
world	as	opposed	to	the	unipolar	world	based	on
American	hegemony	that	was	criticised	by	Putin
in	 his	 Munich	 speech.	 The	 project	 is	 not	 the
construction	of	a	global	‘pole	free’	world	with	a
non-existent	 centre,	 which	 would	 in	 effect
disguise	 the	 domination	 of	 transnational
corporations	 and	 the	 rule	 of	 the	 global	 elites.
Neither	 a	 ‘pole-free’	 nor	 a	 unipolar	 world	 is
suitable	for	Putin.	He	speaks	about	a	multipolar
world	 with	 several	 regional	 poles	 of	 influence.
Their	 balance	 creates	 a	 fair	 system	 of	 the
distribution	of	powers	and	influence	zones.				

The	multipolar	world	principle	brings	forth	the
second	core	of	the	Eurasian	political	philosophy:
the	integration	of	the	post-Soviet	space.	This	is
the	focus	of	Putin’s	programme	right	now.	Russia
alone	cannot	be	an	independent	and	complete	pole
in	 the	 multipolar	 world.	 In	 order	 to	 build	 this
pole,	 Russia	 needs	 allies	 and	 integration
processes	 in	 the	 post-Soviet	 space.	 It	 needs
Kazakhstan,	  Belarus,	  Ukraine,	  Moldova,
Armenia,	and	possibly	Azerbaijan.	It	needs	access
to	 the	 depths	 of	 Central	 Asia	 represented	 by
Kyrgyzstan,	Tajikistan,	and	possibly	Uzbekistan
and	even	Turkmenistan.	This	is	a	long-term	goal,
but	the	creation	of	a	pole	of	the	multipolar	world
is	 necessary.	 Uniting	 our	 energy,	 economic,
military	and	strategic	potentials,	as	well	as	the
territorial	 zones	 where	 natural	 resources	 are
extracted	 and	 their	 delivery	 routes,	 we	 will
transform	ourselves	into	a	genuine	world	power
and	into	a	real	global	player.	We	will	return	to	the

historical	 arena	 as	 a	 civilisation:	 the	 ultimate
result	of	the	creation	of	a	multipolar	world.
The	third	core	of	Eurasian	political	philosophy
is	the	transformation	of	Russia	from	the	liberal
democratic	 model	 which	 was	 copied	 from	 the
West	during	the	1990s	into	an	altogether	unique,
Russian	model	of	development.	The	peculiarity	of
our	 society	 is	 that	 we	 don’t	 have	 a	 proper
bourgeois	nation,	a	single	civil	society	based	on
individualistic,	liberalist	principles	like	America
or	 Europe.	 The	 Russian	 system	 of	 values	 is
radically	 different,	 and	 this	 system	 has	 both
strategic	unity	around	the	Russian	core	and	the
polyphony	of	its	ethnic	groups	—	not	nations	but
ethnic	groups	—	that	live	in	Russia’s	territories,
in	the	post-Soviet	space,	and	which	constitute	a
civilisational	unity.	This	is	what	Eurasianism	in
domestic	 policy	 is	 about:	 single	 strategic
management,	 a	 single	 state	 and	 various	 ethnic
groups,	 each	 of	 which	 does	 not	 represent	 a

national	or	political	entity	but	rather	parts	of	the
spiritual	 treasure	 of	 our	 common	 state.	 In	 the
summer	of	2011,	Putin	spoke	about	the	necessity
of	differentiating	between	a	nation	and	an	ethnos.
A	nation	is	a	single,	unified	state	while	ethnoses
are	 multiple	 and	 different.	 It	 is	 very	 important
here	to	avoid	both	separatist	nationalism	(small
nationalism)	 and	 the	 nationalism	 of	 a	 ‘big
people’.	  These	  nationalistic	  models	  are
incompatible	 with	 the	 Eurasian	 nature	 of	 our
society.	 If	 we	 want	 to	 preserve,	 strengthen	 and
expand	 our	 zone	 of	 influence,	 we	 must	 be
Eurasians	 and	 base	 our	 politics	 on	 a	 Eurasian
political	 philosophy.	 Putin	 declared	 all	 of	 this
when	he	began	to	implement	the	Eurasian	project.
I	think	that	after	a	while,	perhaps	in	a	year	or
two,	a	serious	refurbishing	of	our	political	system
will	be	in	order:	a	two-way	shift	in	the	balance	of
power	between	the	centre	and	the	regions.	On	the
one	 hand,	 I	 think	 such	 notions	 as	 a	 ‘national

republic’	within	Russia	will	fall	by	the	wayside.
But,	simultaneously,	an	expansion	of	the	rights	of
ethnic	groups	will	take	place,	along	with	policies
aimed	at	strengthening	and	culturally	reviving	the
linguistic,	religious	and	cultural	communities	of
the	Russian	territories.	In	other	words,	a	two-way
balance	should	be	kept:	at	once	centralised	and
decentralised	under	a	Eurasian	model,	 which	 is
radically	different	from	the	idea	of	establishing	a
single	individualistic	civil	society.	This	Eurasian
political	 philosophy	 will	 be	 embodied	 by	 Putin
after	March	2012,	and	this	is	all	very	serious.	As
a	Eurasianist,	I	surely	know	what	actions	will	be
taken	next	and	what	further	actions	will	be	taken
after	such	significant	strategic	moves.
Eurasianism
The	only	strategy	which	lives	up	to	the	historical
moment,	 to	 the	 new	 balance	 of	 power	 and	 the
general	mood	of	the	masses,	is	Eurasianism.	It	is

Eurasianism	that	can	be	an	ultimate,	genuine	idea
for	Russia,	as	well	as	a	strategy	to	stick	to.	Such	a
national	idea	has	not	previously	existed	in	Russia:
mostly,	the	country	was	torn	between	liberalism,
which	dominated	the	corrupt	pro-Western	elites,
and	the	disparate,	inconsistent	and	contradictory
elements	of	nationalism	which,	in	effect,	aimed	at
the	 disintegration	 of	 Russia.	 This	 is	 why	 I	 am
absolutely	convinced	that	Putin	must	bet	on	the
Eurasian	model.
Putin’s	 presidency	 over	 the	 next	 12	 years
cannot	follow	the	previous	model.	His	potential
for	legitimacy	has	almost	run	dry	and	will	not	last
long.	The	age	of	technology	instead	of	the	age	of
ideology,	PR-campaigns	instead	of	strategies,	pop
songs	and	gags	instead	of	national	ideas,	is	now
over.	 The	 challenges	 of	 the	 new	 stage	 are
incomparably	more	serious	than	those	that	Putin
confronted	and	overcome	before.	If	Putin	tries	to
rerun	to	the	same	old	models	in	his	domestic	and

foreign	policy,	a	collapse	will	become	imminent.
This	is	a	new	cycle	and	in	order	to	assert	himself
in	 it	 and	 gain	 legitimacy,	 Putin	 needs	 a	 new
strategy.
For	 a	 long	 time,	 Putin	 was	 kept	 from
implementing	this	new	strategy.	All	attempts	to
get	 Eurasian	 ideas	 across	 to	 him	 were	 blocked
either	 by	 PR	 specialists	 who	 turned	 everything
into	a	hotchpotch,	or	by	ideological	enemies	—
liberals	and	pro-Westerners.	If	Putin	wants	to	be
legitimate	 today,	 he	 will	 have	 to	 count	 on
Eurasianism,	 because	 it	 also	 conforms	 to	 the
multi-religious	 and	 polyethnic	 spirit	 of	 Russia,
serves	as	the	basis	for	the	integration	of	the	post-
Soviet	 space	 and,	 in	 international	 politics,
justifies	the	necessity	of	a	multipolar	world	and
the	creation	of	a	polycentric	model.	Polycentrism
is	 often	 cited	 by	 Lavrov.
[260]
	 He	 recently
mentioned	 the	 Eurasian	 Union	 during	 a	 UN
session.

This	is	a	new	topic,	and	previously	our	leaders
had	 never	 mentioned	 this	 Union.	 But	 it	 is
Nazarbayev’s	long-cherished	idea,	as	well	as	the
idea	 of	 our	 own	 Eurasian	 Movement.	 The
Eurasian	 Union	 has	 already	 become	 a	 political
integration	project.	Previously,	there	had	been	no
place	for	it;	it	had	simply	never	been	mentioned
in	 official	 speeches.	 The	 people	 in	 the
presidential	administration,	who	were	in	charge
of	ideology	in	our	country	during	the	Yeltsin	era,
opposed	the	idea	of	the	Eurasian	Union	at	every
turn.	But	this	is	over	now,	and	the	fact	that	Putin
himself	makes	mention	of	the	Eurasian	Union	is
very	telling.
Implementation	 of	 this	 project	 will	 require
competent	people,	decisiveness	and	political	will.
This	is	a	major	problem.	Putin	can	be	dissuaded,
and	everything	he	has	said	may	become	merely
empty	 rhetoric.	 The	 team	 in	 Putin’s	 entourage
responsible	 for	 ideological	 and	 political	 issues

has	 extensive	 experience	 in	 doing	 away	 with
ideological	aspirations,	and	they	can	effectively
turn	an	idea	into	a	PR-campaign	or	a	farce.
Again,	the	Western	countries	will	do	their	best
to	prevent	Eurasian	integration,	because	it	is	an
alternative	world	order	to	theirs.	It	is	possible	that
Putin	will	be	made	to	abandon	the	idea	by	force
because	they	have	too	much	at	stake.	He	will	have
to	fight	for	his	project.	In	my	opinion,	he	could
have	introduced	the	idea	back	in	2001,	but	we	can
assume	that	he	was	pressured	not	to.
If	Putin	acts	according	to	an	‘inertial’	model,
drawing	on	semi-totalitarian,	semi-postmodernist
political	consultants,	he	will	likely	fail.	He	will
be	 declared	 an	 enemy	 of	 the	 West	 and
simultaneously	 lose	 credibility	 within	 patriotic
circles.	Putin	will	be	blown	out	of	the	water	from
both	sides:	he	will	be	attacked	by	liberals	and	not
supported	 by	 patriots.	 His	 only	 hope	 is
Eurasianism.	I	think	that	if	Putin	does	not	become

a	 Eurasianist	 in	 his	 next	 term,	 he	 will	 simply
cease	to	be.	He	was	right	when	he	said,	‘Russia
will	either	be	great	or	it	will	be	nothing.’
Integration	of	Civilisations,	Postmodernist
Style
The	 EurAsEC	 and	 the	 Customs	 Union	 can	 be
viewed	as	the	economic	entities	of	the	Eurasian
Union.	The	composition	of	the	member	countries
within	these	integration	structures	is	the	core	of
the	 Eurasian	 Union.	 But	 the	 Eurasian	 Union	 is
also	a	project	of	political	integration.	Nursultan
Nazarbayev	 proposes	 to	 follow	 the	 European
Union	model.	He	even	wrote	a	Constitution	for
the	Eurasian	Union,	which	replicates	its	European
counterpart.	So	another	question	arises:	what	is
the	 European	 Union,	 a	 confederacy,	 a	 national
state	or	a	new	form	of	organisation	for	a	political
space,	such	as	a	‘postmodern	state’,	as	proposed
by	Robert	Cooper?
[261]

I	 assume	 that	 the	 Eurasian	 Union	 needs	 a
special	 political	 theory	 —	 a	 theory	 of	 the
multipolar	world.	Its	subjects	and	actors	should
be	 not	 traditional	 modernist	 states	 (as	 in	 the
Westphalian	 system),
[262]
	 but	 civilisations:	 a
civilisation	 as	 a	 union.	 The	 entire	 international
system	should	be	reassessed	for	this	purpose.	This
means	that	the	Eurasian	Union	should	become	a
new	political	entity	with	certain	characteristics	of
a	 confederate	 state	 based	 on	 subsidiarity	 and
broad	regional	autonomy,	as	well	as	certain	traits
of	 strategic	 centralism	 which	 is	 typical	 of
classical	empires.
The	idea	of	the	Eurasian	Union	is	an	idea	of
alternative	 postmodernism,	 different	 from	 both
state-centric	 modernism	 and	 pre-modernist
empires.	Its	main	difference	from	pre-modernist
empires	 is	 that	 the	 principle	 of	 political
organisation	 of	 an	 international	 system	 on	 the
grounds	 of	 a	 civilisation	 becomes	 a	 rational

construct,	 and	 is	 reflected	 and	 described	 in
technical	 terms.	 There	 is	 civilisation	 as	 inertia
and	as	a	project.	Eurasianism	proposes	a	project
—	that	is,	a	forceful,	constructed	goal.
Today	Putin	speaks	about	the	Eurasian	Union
as	 an	 intermediary	 project	 between	 Europe	 and
the	 Asian-Pacific	 region,	 but	 this	 intermediary
project	 is	 only	 the	 beginning.	 Europe	 was	 not
built	 in	 a	 day	 and	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 bypassed	 a
political	aspect	during	its	integration	has	yielded
certain	repercussions	today.	The	economy	alone
is	 not	 a	 sufficient	 basis	 for	 building	 anything
significant.	 The	 economy	 is	 a	 very	 unreliable
entity	 and	 does	 not	 determine	 the	 course	 of
history.	One	 should	 integrate	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a
project,	an	idea,	and	a	common	historical	destiny
—	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 the	 common	 civilisation	 and
value	 system.	 This	 is	 a	 strong	 combination
capable	 of	 overcoming	 any	 obstacles.	 It	 could
serve	as	the	basis	for	the	formation	of	a	specific

identity	for	Russia	itself.			
Putin	will	have	to	act	decisively.	The	critical
moment	is	approaching	and	he	will	have	to	act,
whether	he	wants	to	or	not.
In	 order	 to	 realise	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 Eurasian
Union,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 reassess	 the	 entire
existing	 international	 system.	 The	 Union	 is
possible	only	if	it	is	based	on	the	theory	of	the
multipolar	 world:	 this	 should	 be	 the	 starting
point,	and	not	the	technical	measures	of	economic
integration.	The	establishment	of	a	 free	 market
zone	 is	 a	 very	 important	 move	 towards	 the
creation	of	the	Customs	Union	at	the	CIS	level,
but	the	EU	crisis	has	taught	us	that	economics
alone	 is	 not	 enough	 for	 a	 lasting	 integration.
Absent	 a	 common	 political	 project	 and	 proper
geopolitics,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 make	 anything
stable.	 We	 should	 take	 that	 into	 account	 when
building	the	Eurasian	Union.
Eurasianism	 is	 a	 political	 philosophy	 which

cannot	 be	 strictly	 classified	 as	 Right-wing	 and
Orthodox-monarchic	  or	  as	  Left-wing,
Communist,	and	socialist,	let	alone	liberal.	It	is
something	original,	painfully	built	throughout	the
course	 of	 the	 entire	 twentieth	 century.
Eurasianism	 has	 a	 hundred-year-long	 history.
Thus,	this	political	philosophy	has	a	history	and	a
canon	of	texts,	which	is	very	important	for	any
doctrine.	 as	 well	 as	 a	 Eurasian	 analysis	 of
different	historical	periods.	Starting	with	the	First
World	 War,	 it	 includes	 the	 works	 of	 Pyotr
Savitsky	 and	 Nikolai	 Trubetzkoy,	 and	 in	 the
1960s	 and	 the	 1970s	 came	 the	 works	 of	 Lev
Gumilev.
[263]
	 We	 joined	 the	 movement	 in	 the
1980s	and	are	continuing	this	line	of	thought.	We
analyse	the	events	that	have	been	unfolding	for
the	 last	 25	 years	 in	 terms	 of	 Eurasianism.
Eurasianism	 is	 a	 hundred-year-old	 political
philosophy.	It	was	not	simply	formed	and	then
discarded;	 it	 has	 perpetuated	 its	 existence.	 It

exists	in	contemporary	Russia	as	a	compendium
of	political	philosophy	based	on	three	principal
aspects.
The	Three	Pillars	of	Putin
First.	When	it	comes	to	foreign	policy,	the	theory
of	 the	 multipolar	 world	 should	 play	 a	 decisive
role.	 I	 teach	 the	 sociology	 of	 international
relations	in	the	Sociology	Department	at	Moscow
State	 University,	 and	 I	 have	 found,	 to	 my
surprise,	 that	 the	 theory	 of	 a	 multipolar	 world
simply	does	not	exist,	although	it	has	been	fully
developed	 in	 Eurasianism.	 Eurasianism	 is	 a
multipolar	world	theory	(MWT),	not	simply	the
desire	for	multipolarity.	If	we	try	and	sum	up	the
basic	principles	of	the	MWT,	they	are	as	follows:
1.		A	multipolar	world	is	a	radical	alternative	to
the	unipolar	world	(which	exists	now)	in	that
it	 insists	 on	 several	 independent	 and

sovereign	 centres	 of	 global	 strategic
decision-making	on	a	planetary	scale.
2 .		These	 centres	 should	 be	 equipped	 and	 be
materially	independent	to	be	able	to	defend
their	 sovereignty	 in	 the	 face	 of	 a	 direct
invasion	by	a	potential	enemy,	personified
by	 today’s	 most	 advanced	 power.	 This
requirement	basically	implies	the	possibility
to	 confront	 the	 material	 and	 military-
strategic	hegemony	of	the	US	and	the	NATO
countries.
3 .		Many	 decision-making	 centres	 are	 not
obliged	 to	 recognise	 the	 universality	 of
Western	 norms	 and	 values	 as	sine	 qua
non
[264]
	 (democracy,	 liberalism,	 the	 free
market,	 parliamentarism,	 human	 rights,
individualism,	cosmopolitism,	etc.)	and	can
be	 fully	 independent	 of	 the	 spiritual
hegemony	of	the	West.
4.		A	multipolar	world	does	not	involve	a	return

to	the	bipolar	system,	because	there	is	not	a
single	force	today	that	can	strategically	or
ideologically	 confront	 the	 material	 and
spiritual	 hegemony	 of	 the	 contemporary
West	and	its	leader,	the	US.	There	should	be
more	than	two	poles.		
5 .		The	 multipolar	 world	 does	 not	 seriously
consider	the	sovereignty	of	existing	national
states.	Such	sovereignty	is	confined	to	legal
terminology	 and	 is	 not	 confirmed	 by
sufficient	enforcement,	strategic,	 economic
and	 political	 potential.	 In	 order	 to	 be	 a
sovereign	subject	in	the	twenty-first	century,
a	 national	 state	 is	 no	 longer	 enough.	 Real
sovereignty	 can	 only	 be	 possessed	 by	 an
aggregate,	 a	 coalition	 of	 states.	 The
Westphalian	system,	which	still	exists	today,
does	not	reflect	the	reality	of	the	system	of
international	 relations	 and	 should	 be
reconsidered.

6.		Multipolarity	is	not	an	equivalent	of	either
bipolarity	or	multilaterality	because	it	does
not	place	its	decision-making	centre	(pole)
either	 under	 the	 jurisdiction	 of	 a	 world
government	or	under	the	club	of	the	US	or
its	democratic	allies	(‘the	global	West’),	nor
at	 the	 sub-national	 level,	 under	 NGOs	 or
other	 instances	 of	 civil	 society.	 This	 pole
must	be	located	elsewhere.
These	 six	 points	 set	 the	 pace	 for	 further
developments	and	are	a	condensed	expression	of
the	 main	 features	 of	 multipolarity.	 But	 this
description,	 albeit	 significantly	 enhancing	 our
understanding	 of	 multipolarity,	 is	 not	 yet	 a
complete	 theory.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 preliminary
conclusion,	  a	  launch	  pad	  for	  further
comprehensive	theoretical	thinking.
Secondly,	 there	 is	 the	 imperative	 of	 the
integration	 of	 the	 post-Soviet	 space	 stemming

from	the	above	multipolarity.	One	can	say	that	in
a	 historical	 context,	 it	 is	 the	 restoration	 of	 the
Russian	Empire	and	the	USSR	on	new	terms.	As
the	Russian	Empire	was	different	from	the	USSR,
so	the	Eurasian	Union	is	different	from	both	the
USSR	 and	 the	 Russian	 Empire.	 There	 is	 a
different	ideological	base,	different	mechanisms,
different	actors	and	different	integration	models
in	play.	In	one	case	it	is	colonisation,	in	the	other
a	 socialist	 revolution,	 and	 in	 our	 case	 it	 is	 a
voluntary	 specific	 integration	 model	 similar	 to
the	European	Union,	under	the	model	outlined	by
Nursultan	Nazarbayev	in	1994.
[265]
	But	this	theory
of	 the	 integration	 of	 the	 post-Soviet	 space
actually	exists,	and	such	is	the	second	aspect	of
the	Eurasian	political	philosophy.
Its	third	and	final	aspect	is	the	socio-political
structure	 of	 Russia.	 Eurasianism	 proposes	 a
specific	 answer.	 We	 reject	 the	 creation	 of	 a
national	state,	which	leads	to	the	levelling	of	all

ethnic	 cultures	 existing	 within	 the	 territory	 of
Russia.	 We	 reject	 the	 model	 of	 a	 civil	 society
based	 on	 the	 principle	 of	 individualism	 which
underlies	the	European	Union,	and	we	reject	the
model	 of	 ethnic	 separatism	 in	 which	 ethnic
groups	 strive	 for	 political	 independence.	 These
form	the	basis	of	the	political	Eurasian	project	for
the	 Russian	 Federation:	 a	 single	 strategic
management	and	a	polyphony	of	ethnic	cultures.
We	 likewise	 reject	 any	 attributes	 of	 political
independence	 within	 the	 Russian	 Federation
(sovereignty	 or	 even	 the	 status	 of	 a	 national
republic).	Ramzan	Kadyrov	was	absolutely	right
when	he	refused	the	presidential	post	and	called
himself	‘the	head	of	the	Chechen	republic’.	This
must	become	the	norm.
The	next	necessary	step	is	the	abolition	of	the
status	 of	 national	 republics.	 That	 said,
Eurasianism	does	not	want	to	diminish	the	ethnic,
religious	 or	 cultural	 rights	 of	 any	 communities

living	within	Russian	territory.	Both	nationalists
and	liberals	accuse	us	of	trying	to	do	this,	but	we
support	 Konstantin	 Leontiev’s	 ‘flourishing
complexity’.
[266]
	
The	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
was	copied	from	its	European	equivalents	and	not
adapted	to	our	cultural	specifics.	It	contains	a	lot
of	mutually	contradicting	theses.	For	instance,	it
states	 that	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Federation	 are
independent	states	and	continues	to	say	that	the
only	 sovereignty	 is	 possessed	 by	 the	 Russian
Federation.	This	Constitution	can	be	interpreted
any	way	you	like:	in	a	Eurasian,	nationalistic	or
liberal	 separatist	 way.	 This	 Constitution	 was
largely	the	basis	of	the	conflicts	and	bloody	wars
of	 the	 1990s,	 and	 in	 itself	 it	 requires
interpretation,	not	rewriting,	which	is	something
Putin	 is	 successfully	 accomplishing.	 He
progressed	 from	 viewing	 the	 subjects	 of	 the
Federation	 as	 possessing	 state	 status	 via	 the

appointment	 of	 their	 leaders	 to	 the	 obvious
reduction	of	their	status	as	states.
Thus,	we	will	create	the	possibility	for	both
the	 preservation	 of	 territorial	 integrity	 and	 a
possible	 integration	 of	 the	 post-Soviet	 space,
without	infringing	on	the	rights	of	its	indigenous
peoples.	In	this	regard,	Russians	don’t	even	have
their	own	federal	subject,	and	they	don’t	need	it.
We	are	a	state-forming	core.	The	Russians	can
speak	their	language	wherever	they	want	and	all
other	 Russian	 citizens,	 both	 Russians	 and	 non-
Russians,	must	know	the	Russian	language.
As	 for	 the	 protection	 of	 the	 rights	 of	 the
indigenous	peoples,	this	point	is	included	in	the
Constitution.	 The	 ethnic	 processes	 are	 very
complex.	As	a	specialist	in	ethnic	sociology,	I	can
say	 that	 a	 definitive	 nomenclature	 of	 ethnic
groups	 is	 unattainable.	 These	 groups	 vanish,
emerge	 and	 split.	 Certain	 ethnic	 groups	 view
themselves	 as	 something	 separate,	 such	 as	 the

Mishari
[267]
	 and	 the	 Kryashens.
[268]
	 They	 can	 be
distinguished	as	separate	ethnic	groups	based	on
religion	 or	 otherwise,	 and	 they	 can	 view
themselves	 as	 a	 separate	 cultural	 or	 even
ethnocultural	phenomenon.
This	is	the	reason	why	ethnic	groups	must	not
obtain	legal	status.	Nevertheless,	the	authorities
must	 constitutionally	 respect	 the	 rights	 of	 all
ethnic	groups	and	peoples	which	exist	within	the
territory	of	the	Russian	Federation.
Eurasianism	contains	answers	to	all	questions:
from	housing	and	utilities	reforms	to	healthcare.
In	social	politics,	Eurasianism	leans	towards	the
Left,	towards	the	socialist	position.	One	can	note
Eurasianism‘s	kinship	with	socialism,	albeit	not
in	 a	 doctrinal,	 Marxist	 or	 atheistic	 sense	 but
rather	in	an	Orthodox	or	Islamic	sense	(in	terms
of	the	structure	of	Islamic	communities).
Eurasianists	 are	 not	 dogmatists.	 Eurasianists
have	always	called	into	question	some	elements

of	 their	 programme.	 What	 matters	 is	 that
economics	must	be	organic,	fair	and	holistic	—
that	 is,	 based	 on	 the	 principle	 of	 integrity.	 I
personally	 like	 socialism,	 but	 I	 think	 that	 this
issue	 is	 open	 to	 debate	 and	 discussion.	 On	 the
other	 hand,	 with	 respect	 to	 the	 principle	 of
multipolarity,	we	fully	support	Nazarbayev’s	idea
of	multipolar	currencies,	which	states	that	every
region	of	the	world	must	have	its	own	currency.
We	oppose	dollar	imperialism.
The	Eurasian	Union	and	the	US
The	US	attitude	towards	the	Eurasian	Union	will
without	a	doubt	be	radically	and	expressly	hostile.
The	 creation	 of	 the	 Eurasian	 Union	 directly
contradicts	 the	 adopted	 strategy	 of	 the	 US
national	 security	 apparatus,	 which	 aims	 at
unipolarity.	 The	 US	 seeks	 to	 prevent	 the
emergence	of	a	political,	economic	and	military-
strategic	 entity	 in	 Europe	 capable	 of	 limiting

American	control	over	the	European	zone.	This
was	stated	in	Paul	Wolfowitz’	‘Defense	Planning
Guidance’	(1992)
[269]
	and	later	fully	reiterated	in
principal	American	strategy	documents.
The	creation	of	the	Eurasian	Union	means	the
rejection	 of	 American	 hegemony	 and	 the
transition	towards	building	a	multipolar	world.	In
this	world,	the	US	may	remain	a	great	power,	but
only	 regionally,	 not	 internationally.	 Nobody	 in
Washington	seems	to	be	prepared	for	this.	It	will
result	in	a	tangible	conflict	between	Atlanticism
and	 Eurasianism	 (which	 never	 really	 stopped
anyway),	a	great	war	of	the	continents.
The	 Eurasian	 Union	 is	 a	 key	 pole	 in	 the
multipolar	 world	 in	 a	 strategic,	 political	 and
economic	 sense.	 Obviously,	 Eurasia’s	 main
strength	 is	 in	 its	 energy	 and	 natural	 resources.
Nuclear	weapons	and	huge	territories	are	also	of
great	importance.	All	of	this	leads	to	impressive
geopolitical	 potential.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 the

Eurasian	 Union	 lacks	 access	 to	 advanced
technologies,	 industrial	 potential,	 dynamic
technical	development	and	a	sufficient	consumer
market.	This	makes	Eurasia	dependent	on	Europe
and	Asia,	but	not	on	the	US.
This	is	why	the	successful	establishment	of	the
Eurasian	Union	requires	a	Eurasian-European	and
a	 Eurasian-Chinese	 partnership:	 ‘Great	 Europe
from	Lisbon	to	Vladivostok’	(as	Vladimir	Putin
wrote)	and	the	Moscow-Beijing	axis.
[270]
	Besides,
the	Eurasian	Union	would	greatly	benefit	from	a
partnership	 with	 the	 Islamic	 world,	 as	 well	 as
with	Latin	America,	the	Asian-Pacific	countries
and	Africa.	 They	 are	 all	 potential	 poles	 of	 the
multipolar	world.
None	of	them	is	perfect	and	every	pole	lacks
certain	 resources.	 Together,	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a
dialogue	of	civilisations,	we	can	build	a	balanced
and	 fair	 world	 order.	 Will	 all	 conflicts	 be
immediately	resolved?	No.	They	can	spring	up	at

any	time.	Nevertheless,	there	are	always	ways	to
avoid	 them.	 Instead	 of	 wars	 and	 conflicts,	 we
should	 start	 a	 peaceful	 dialogue.	 The	 clash	 of
civilisations	is	not	fatal	in	itself.
One	 must	 learn	 to	 build	 an	 international
system	on	the	basis	of	broad	and	thoughtful	social
and	cultural	anthropology	and	not	on	the	basis	of
Western-style	  American-European	  cultural
racism,	 colonialist	 liberalism,	 or	 totalitarian
universalism	 based	 on	 purely	 Western	 values
(which	 are	 individualistic,	 market-oriented,	 and
capitalist).	To	achieve	this,	Putin	will	need	a	new
kind	 of	 political	 elite:	 dedicated,	 tough	 and
morally	sound.
The	Avant-Garde	Nature	of	Neo-
Eurasianism
Neo-Eurasianism,	which	appeared	in	Russia	in	the
late	 1980s	 and	 was	 developed	 by	 me	 and	 my
colleagues	 from	 the	 Eurasia	 Party	 and	 the

International	 Eurasia	 Movement,	 fully	 absorbed
the	elements	of	the	previous	Eurasian	episteme,
but	 complemented	 them	 with	 elements	 of
traditionalism,	  geopolitics,	  structuralism,
Heidegger’s	fundamental	ontology,	sociology	and
anthropology.	 We	 have	 done	 extensive	 work	 to
accommodate	the	basic	principles	of	Eurasianism
to	the	reality	of	the	second	half	of	the	twentieth
and	 early	 twenty-first	 centuries,	 in	 light	 of	 the
latest	scientific	developments	and	research.
If	 we	 are	 to	 take	 the	 Eurasian	 model	 of
empire-building	 seriously,	 Putin	 will	 have	 to
focus	on	the	following	aspects	of	it:
1.		Eurasianism	and	neo-Eurasianism	pertain	to
conservative	 ideologies	 and	 have	 the
features	 of	 both	 fundamental	 conservatism
(traditionalism)	 and	 the	 Conservative
Revolution	  (including	  the	  social
conservatism	 of	 the	 Left-wing	 Eurasians).

The	only	movement	that	Eurasianists	reject
in	 conservatism	 is	 liberal	 conservatism,
which	 continues	 to	 dominate	 Russia’s
domestic	policy.
2  .		Eurasianism,	 aware	 of	 the	 universal
aspirations	of	the	Western	logos,
[271]
	refuses
to	accept	this	universality	as	inevitable.	This
is	a	key	aspect	of	Eurasianism.	It	perceives
Western	 culture	 as	 a	 local	 and	 transient
phenomenon	and	asserts	the	multiplicity	of
cultures	 and	 civilisations	 which	 coexist	 at
different	 points	 in	 a	 historical	 cycle.
Modernism	 for	 Eurasians	 is	 a	 purely
Western	 phenomenon	 and	 other	 cultures
must	 expose	 these	 claims	 to	 Western
universality	 for	 what	 they	 are	 in	 order	 to
base	their	societies	on	their	own,	domestic
values.	There	is	no	single	historical	process.
Every	 nation	 has	 its	 own	 historical	 model
that	 moves	 at	 different	 speeds	 and

sometimes	  in	  different	  directions.
Eurasianism	 is,	 in	 effect,	 epistemological
pluralism.	  The	  unitary	  system	  of
modernism,	 including	 science,	 politics,
culture	and	anthropology,	is	contrasted	with
a	multiplicity	of	epistemes	built	around	the
fundamentals	of	every	existing	civilisation:
the	 Eurasian	 episteme	 for	 the	 Russian
civilisation,	 the	 Chinese	 episteme	 for	 the
Chinese	 civilisation,	 the	 Islamic	 for	 the
Islamic	civilisation,	the	Hindu	for	the	Hindu
civilisation,	and	so	forth.	It	is	only	on	the
basis	of	these	epistemes,	stripped	of	Western
features,	that	further	socio-political,	cultural
and	 economic	 projects	 and	 constructions
should	be	built.
In	the	twentieth	century,	modernity	and	Western
civilisation	 were	 criticised	 not	 only	 by
Eurasianist	Russians	but	by	Western	thinkers	as

well:	Spengler	and	Toynbee,
[272]
	and	especially	by
the	 structuralists,	 primarily	 by	 Lévi-Strauss,
[273]
the	creator	of	structural	anthropology.	Structural
anthropology	is	based	upon	the	principal	equality
of	 different	 cultures,	 from	 the	 primitive	 to	 the
most	advanced.	In	this	view,	Western	culture	has
no	 claim	 to	 superiority	 over	 even	 the	 most
‘savage’	and	‘primitive’	tribe.	It	should	be	noted
that	 the	 Eurasianists	 Roman	 Jakobson
[274]
	 and
Nikolai	 Trubetzkoy,	 the	 founders	 of	 phonology
and	 the	 major	 representatives	 of	 structural
linguistics	in	Russia,	were	Lévi-Strauss’	teachers
and	taught	him	the	basics	of	structural	analysis
that	 he	 readily	 acknowledged.	 Thus,	 an
intellectual	continuity	can	be	traced:	Eurasianism
to	 structuralism	 to	 neo-Eurasianism.	 Neo-
Eurasianism	becomes	in	this	sense	a	restoration
of	a	broad	range	of	ideas,	insights	and	intuitions
outlined	 by	 the	 first	 Eurasianists,	 which
organically	 included	 the	 results	 of	 scientific

activities	 carried	 out	 by	 various	 schools	 and
authors	 (mostly	 conservative)	 that	 were
developing	  simultaneously	  throughout	  the
twentieth	century.
Putin	has	declared	his	intention	to	build	the
Eurasian	Union,	but	there	are	certain	doubts.
Will	 the	 project	 of	 the	 Eurasian	 Union	 be
confined	to	the	economic	integration	of	the	post-
Soviet	space?	Will	Putin	be	able	to	insist	on	this
Union	 as	 a	 strategic	 vector	 in	 Russia’s
development	 towards	 Eurasianism?	 Note	 that
contemporary	  world	  globalism	  and	  the
international	 liberal	 hegemony	 will	 resist	 this
project	and	pressure	the	President	by	any	means
possible.	Will	Putin	withstand	this	international
pressure?	 Can	 the	 technical	 component	 of	 the
Eurasian	 Union	 cancel	 out	 its	 strategic,
attitudinal,	historical	and	spiritual	meaning?	Will
this	 vector	 of	 development	 help	 us	 draw
important	conclusions?	Is	the	President	capable

of	such	a	great	construction?	Can	he	see	all	the
advantages	 and	 prospects	 of	 this	 project?	 Let’s
face	it:	in	purely	technical	terms,	the	project	will
most	 likely	 fail	 because	 it	 has	 too	 many
opponents	and	objections.	The	implementation	of
this	 project	 will	 require	 incredible	 will	 and
determination.	 If	 it	 works,	 we	 will	 establish	 a
theoretical	and	material	base	for	the	realisation	of
the	 multipolar	 world	 theory,	 and	 we	 will
effectively	 implement	 the	 concept	 of	 Large
Spaces	united	similarly	to	the	European	Union	in
place	 of	 national	 states.	 In	 this	 case,	 we	 will
actualise	the	idea	of	multiple	civilisations	instead
of	a	single	global	civilisation	as	promoted	by	the
West.	In	this	historical	deed,	we	will	enable	the
rejection	of	the	individualism	that	is	central	to	the
liberal	model	and	replace	it	with	a	pluralism	of
values,	as	well	as	the	establishment	of	peoples,
ethnic	 groups,	 religions	 and	 cultures	 as
independent	 subjects.	 Their	 mentalities	 should

not	 necessarily	 be	 moulded	 to	 accommodate
Western	requirements.	And	last,	but	not	least	is
the	revival	of	our	common	motherland	—	Great
Russia	at	a	new	historical	stage.
The	 West	 will	 be	 the	 first	 to	 object	 to	 this
project,	 and	 they	 will	 be	 followed	 by	 the	 fifth
column	inside	the	country.	Russian	citizens	will
have	questions	about	the	advantages	and	benefits
of	such	unification	as	well,	namely,	whether	the
construction	of	the	great	Eurasian	project	would
have	a	negative	impact	on	their	standard	of	living
for	the	sake	of	some	sort	of	global	achievement	or
special	 mission.	 But	 all	 the	 above-mentioned
questions	 pale	 before	 this	 one:	 is	 Putin	 really
standing	on	the	threshold	of	Russian	revival	and
thinking	and	acting	in	accordance	with	Russian
history	 and	 the	 spirit	 of	 the	 people,	 moving
towards	the	Eurasian	Union,	or	is	this	yet	another
mirage	 which	 will	 dissipate	 as	 soon	 as	 we
confront	the	first	problems?

The	Russian	Order:	The	Relevance
of	the	New	Oprichnina
Eurasianism	and	the	Elites
There	 is	 a	 concept	 called	 ‘Eurasian	 selection’.
This	 is	 a	 model	 developed	 by	 the	 first
Eurasianists	that	is	used	to	determine	what	sort	of
people	should	head	the	state.	They	analysed	the
experience	of	Genghis	Khan,	the	steppe	empires
that	emphasised	military	virtues	(loyalty,	honour,
and	 ‘long	 will’):
[275]
	 that	 is,	 specific	 ethical
qualities	 which	 must	 serve	 as	 the	 basis	 of	 the
selection	of	the	Eurasian	elites.	Today’s	Russian
elite	does	not	meet	these	criteria.
Naturally,	the	best	way	to	create	an	adequate
political	elite	is	through	revolutions	and	wars.	In
such	cases	the	strongest,	the	aristocracy,	come	to
power.	A	 time	 of	 peace	 is	 usually	 the	 time	 of
mediocre	leaders	or	sub-passionaries.	According
to	Gumilev,	there	are	a	hundred	sub-passionaries

per	 one	 true	 passionary.
[276]
	 They	 are	 different
from	the	masses	in	that	they	want	something	but
cannot	achieve	it,	and	they	make	up	a	class	of	the
‘sub-elite’.
There	is	a	popular	Eurasian	slogan:	‘career	or
revolution’.	If	one	can	get	a	career,	he	will	get	on
in	life.	If	not,	he	will	opt	for	a	revolution.	The
only	thing	that	will	not	be	tolerated	is	obedience.
A	man	of	the	elite,	a	man	of	a	ruling	type,	is	not
ready	to	tolerate	the	rule	of	someone	worse	than
him.	And	he	will	not	tolerate	it.	He	will	either	be
integrated	into	this	power	and	improve	it	or	he
will	destroy	it.	No	society	can	exist	without	an
elite	class.	If	a	society	does	not	have	its	own	elite,
its	place	will	be	taken	by	a	foreign	one.	If	we
cannot	rule	by	ourselves,	somebody	else	will	rule
us.	Eurasianists	believe	that	a	country	should	be
ruled	by	the	best	representatives	of	the	society.
The	basis	of	Eurasian	method	of	selection	is	the
aristocracy,	the	passionaries.

Is	this	scenario	realistic	today?	In	my	opinion,
given	the	current	power	structure,	it	is	not.	If	the
Kremlin	doors	remain	closed	and	various	scum,
lackeys	 and	 buffoons	 squeeze	 their	 way	 in
through	a	narrow	hole,	this	door	will	have	to	be
taken	by	storm,	if	not	by	my	generation,	then	by
the	next.	This	is	the	Pareto	principle
[277]
	and	not
an	 urge	 towards	 revolution	 and	 chaos.	 This	 is
why,	 I	 think,	 our	 leaders	 should	 reassess	 their
attitude	towards	the	elite	and	accept	the	Eurasian
method	of	selection	before	it	is	too	late.
The	Russian	Oprichnina	as	the	Archetypal
New	Elite
The	Russian	oprichnina	is	both	a	historical	and	a
supra-historical	phenomenon.	The	word	is	derived
from	 the	 Russian	 adverb	oprich	 (‘aside’	 or
‘aloof’).	In	Old	Russian,	it	was	synonymous	with
krome	 (‘besides’),	 that	 is,	na	 kromke	(‘on	 the
brim’),	hence	kromeshniy	(‘pitch	dark’).	For	this

reason,	 the	oprichniki	 were	 sometimes	 called
kromeshniky.	 The	oprichnina	received	the	lands
that	 were	 ‘aside’	 from	 the	 main	 administrative
territories	—	the	zemstva.
Ivan	the	Terrible
[278]
	created	the	oprichnina
[279]
for	two	main	purposes:	the	mobilisation	of	forces
for	the	fierce	struggle	against	the	West	and	the
restructuring	 of	 the	 administrative	 elite,	 whose
rigidity	prevented	the	development	of	a	solution
to	 the	 new	 challenges	 facing	 Muscovy	 during
centralisation.	 After	 14	 years	 of	 existence,	 the
oprichnina	was	abolished.	Whether	it	fulfilled	its
mission	or	not	is	still	open	to	debate,	but	the	point
of	its	creation	was	to	bring	about	a	new	and	more
effective	system	of	state	management	capable	of
solving	new	tasks.						
At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 Italian	 sociologist
Vilfredo	Pareto	proved	that	the	establishment	of
entities	 similar	 to	 the	oprichnina	is	 a	 classic
motif	in	political	history.	When	the	ruling	elites

‘freeze	 up’	 and	 are	 shut	 down,	 the	 important
process	of	elite	rotation	comes	to	a	halt.	In	order
to	 bring	 new	 blood	 into	 the	 ruling	 class,	 it	 is
sometimes	  essential	  to	  create	parallel
hierarchies.	 These	 hierarchies	 are	 based	 on
personal	qualities,	energy,	courage,	passion,	and
ideological	convictions	—	in	short,	on	energetic
idealism,	 as	 opposed	 to	 previous	 hierarchies
where	noble	origin,	wealth	and	clan	connections
guarantee	 a	 high	 position	 in	 the	 political-
administrative	 system.	 Therefore,	 the	 Russian
oprichnina	is	a	textbook	example	of	the	law	of
elite	rotation:	a	cadre	revolution	from	above.
The	parallel	hierarchy	is	usually	created	on	the
basis	of	special	ideologies	or	even	cults.	Hence
the	 chivalric	 orders,	 mystical	 Islamic	 orders
(tariqas),	 Indian	 Tantric	 sects,	 Taoist	 and
Buddhist	 sects	 in	 China	 and	 Japan,	 and	 so	 on.
Every	 parallel	 hierarchy	 has	 its	 sacrality,	 its
symbols,	and	its	charismatic	pole	located	in	the

centre	 of	 the	 entire	 structure	 as	 the	 organising
element.	Many	features	of	the	oprichnina	suggest
that	 it	 employed	 certain	 elements	 of	 this
sacrality:	 dog	 heads	 and	 brooms	 tied	 to	 one’s
saddle,	 aside	 from	 being	 an	 obvious	 metaphor
(‘bite	the	throats	of	the	enemies	of	the	state	and
sweep	 the	 evil	 out	 of	 Holy	 Russia’),	 hint	 at
alternative	 meanings.	 A	 dog	 in	 mystical
symbolism	 is	 a	 ‘guide	 for	 the	 dead’,	 a	 sacred
animal,	which	in	various	myths	about	journeys	to
the	 underworld	 leads	 a	 deceased	 person	 from
death	 to	 an	 ultimate	 revival.	 The	 Dominican
monks	made	a	pun	on	their	own	name	and	spelled
it	as	Domini	canes,	the	dogs	of	the	Lord,	thinking
of	 themselves	 as	 the	 dogs	 guarding	 the	 sheep
(Christians)	 from	 the	 wolves	 (the	 heretics	 and
non-Christians)	 and	 serving	 the	 Shepherd	 (the
Christ).	 But,	 unlike	 sheep,	 dogs	 were	 at	 the
forefront	of	battles	against	wolves.	The	oprichniki
defended	 the	 sacrality	 of	 Rus	 and	 fought	 its

enemies,	both	domestic	and	foreign.	But,	like	all
dogs,	they	retained	something	of	the	wolf.
The	broom	in	ancient	cults	was	a	symbol	of	a
sacral	marriage.	 In	 Slavic	 tradition,	 before	 the
arrival	 of	 the	 bridal	 procession,	 the	 house	 was
swept	with	special	‘wedding	brooms’.	The	broom
plays	a	central	ritualistic	role	in	the	weddings	and
engagement	ceremonies	of	many	peoples.	It	has
an	express	erotic	symbolism.	It	is	possible	that
the	oprichniki	had	similar	rituals	too,	and	what	is
described	 as	 their	 ‘excesses’	 and	 ‘licentious
behaviour’	could,	in	fact,	have	a	ritualistic	sense
in	 the	 same	 vine	 as	 the	 Shaivite	 Tantric
[280]
tradition.			
The	 centre	 of	oprichnina	 sacrality	 was	 the
figure	 of	 Ivan	 Vasilievich	 the	 Terrible	 himself
and	 the	symbolism	 of	 death	 that	 constantly
occupied	 his	 mind	 and	 his	 imagination.	 It	 is
known	 that	 Ivan	 personally	 prepared	 three
Orthodox	canons,	one	of	which	was	dedicated	to

the	Angel	of	Death,	the	terrible	Angel	(and	this
canon	is	still	widely	used	by	Old	Believers).
Therefore,	  the	oprichnina	 was	 a	 parallel
hierarchy	with	its	own	specific	symbolism,	rituals
and	 purposes.	 But	 the	oprichnina	 theorist	 Ivan
Peresvetov	 (some	 authors	 dispute	 his	 existence
and	 even	 claim	 that	 ‘Peresvetov’	 was	 a
pseudonym	 for	 Ivan	 the	 Terrible	 himself)	 was
significantly	influenced	by	Turkish
Janissaries,
[281]
	 the	 militant	 Sufis
[282]
	 of	 the
Sublime	Porte,
[283]
	 another	 secret	 order	 with	 its
own	symbolism	and	rituals.
Oprichnina	 has	 obviously	 matured	 in
contemporary	 Russia.	 The	 situation	 is	 very
similar	to	that	of	the	seventeenth	century:	there
are	 external	 threats	 (from	 Western	 pressure,
NATO	expansion,	and	the	‘orange	revolutions’	in
the	 CIS)	 and	 the	 internal	 disintegration	 of	 the
vertical	  power	  (unprecedented	  levels	  of
corruption,	  moral	  degradation,	  alienation,

impotence,	 and	 degeneration	 of	 the	 comprador
elites).	 There	 is	 a	 functional,	 psychological,
social	and	ideological	necessity	for	it.	The	Russia
of	Yeltsin,	which	has	been	somewhat	solidified
by	 Vladimir	 Putin,	 is	 gradually	 sinking,	 and	 is
starting	 to	 melt	 and	 turn	 sour	 before	 our	 very
eyes.	The	hopes	for	evolutionary	patriotism	are
fading.	The	situation	is	quickly	becoming	critical.
The	 parties	 are	 weak	 and	 illusory.	 The
administrative	 vertical	 is	 incompetent	 and
corrupt.	The	national	ideology	is	gone.	And	even
Putin	 himself,	 contrary	 to	 the	 wailings	 of	 his
opponents,	 does	 not	 have	 anything	 in	 common
with	 an	 authoritarian,	 charismatic	 dictator.	 So,
only	 an	 Order	 can	 save	 the	 day,	 along	 with
everything	that	it	entails.	What	will	serve	as	its
centre?	What	symbols	will	it	have?	What	kind	of
sacrality	 will	 it	 appeal	 to?	 These	 questions	 are
open	to	debate.
One	thing	is	clear:	Putin	is	not	Ivan,	and	the

historical	 opportunity	 to	 resemble	 him	 is	 now
lost.	 So,	 the	 new	oprichnina	must	be	organised
under	a	different,	non-authoritarian	principle.	The
Order	 has	 only	 one	 Russia	 left:	 the	 parallel
motherland,	Holy	Russia,	covered	by	the	rubble
and	 sediment	 of	 history.	 There	 is	 an	 enemy,
though:	 the	 Orange	 Atlanticist	 enemy,	 both
external	 and	 internal.	 As	 the	 Pareto	 principle
shows,	parallel	hierarchies	are	not	always	formed
from	above.	They	are	created	now	and	then	by	the
counter-elites	—	the	passionate	types	who	did	not
find	 a	 slot	 in	 the	 closed,	 greedy	 and	 rapidly
deteriorating	ruling	classes.	These	are	all	reasons
for	the	new	oprichnina	to	emerge	in	Russia,	but
its	 nature,	 character,	 structures	 and	 symbolism
have	 not	 been	 defined	 yet.	 I	 am	 personally
convinced	 that	 the	 ultimate	 ideology	 in	 this
situation	is	Eurasianism,	which	was	devised	by	its
founding	fathers	as	a	Russian	Order.

6.	Putin:	What	Next?
Putin’s	First	Eight	Years:	A
Conservative’s	Balance
How	justified	was	the	support	of	Putin	provided
by	the	conservative	national	patriotic	forces	and,
primarily,	by	our	Eurasian	movement?	What	did
Putin	achieve	and	where	did	he	fail?	What	did	he
want	to	achieve?	Have	our	hopes	been	justified?
The	Labours	of	Hercules:	A	Summary
Let	 me	 remind	 you	 that	 at	 the	 beginning	 of
Putin’s	presidency	I	published	an	article,	‘On	the
twelve	labours	of	Hercules’,	comparing	Vladimir
Putin	to	Hercules.	On	his	way	to	the	top,	Putin,	in
my	opinion,	almost	immediately	carried	out	six
fundamental	 feats.	 First,	 he	 stopped	 the
disintegration	 of	 Russia,	 suppressing	 Chechen
(and,	 more	 broadly,	 North	 Caucasian)	 ethno-

Islamic	separatism.	Second,	he	strengthened	the
vertical	 power	 and	 the	 territorial	 integrity	 of
Russia,	introducing	the	federal	districts,	taming
the	governors	and	subsequently	abolishing	their
elections	altogether.
[284]
	Third,	he	stopped	blindly
following	 the	 Americans’	 lead	 and	 started	 to
defend	 Russia’s	 national	 interests	 in	 foreign
policy	 to	 the	 point	 of	 worsening	 relations	 with
Washington.	 Fourth,	 he	 stopped	 the	 wave	 of
liberal	 Westernist	 Russophobia	 (stopping	 them
from	 attacking	 the	 Soviet	 past	 and	 sparking
interest	in	the	Tsarist	past)	and	cut	down	on	ultra-
liberal	 journalism,	 reducing	 it	 to	 the	 narrow
peripheral	platform	of	Echo	Moskvy	and	Internet
blogs.	 Fifth,	 he	 ousted	 the	 rebellious	 oligarchs,
who	aspired	to	control	the	political	processes	and
the	 Russian	 economy,	 keeping	 those	 who
accepted	 the	 new	 rules	 of	 the	 game	 at	 arm’s
length,	 in	 effect	 nationalising	 the	 principal
mining	 and	 extraction	 monopolies.	And	 finally,

he	set	to	strengthen	Russian	positions	in	the	post-
Soviet	space,	giving	the	green	light	to	the	agents
of	integration:	the	EurAsEC,	the	CSTO,	and	so
on.
These	accomplishments	stood	in	sharp	contrast
to	the	programme	of	Yeltsin	and	his	entourage
and	represented	a	direct	antithesis	to	the	policies
of	the	1990s.	The	six	labours	of	Hercules	which	I
have	 laid	 out	 without	 a	 shadow	 of	 irony	 and
which	I	consciously	admire	provided	Putin	with
the	unconditional	support	of	the	majority	of	the
population	and	the	conservative	patriotic	circles,
which	identify	their	political	interests	with	those
of	the	Russian	people	and	the	logic	of	Russian
history.			
Has	Putin	deviated	from	those	measures	to	the
point	where	one	could	come	to	regret	supporting
him?	The	critical	moment	was	the	events	of	9/11,
when	 Putin	 seemed	 to	 betray	 the	 Eurasian
geopolitical	  imperative	  by	  supporting

Washington	in	the	wake	of	the	terrorist	attacks
and	endorsing	the	invasion	of	Afghanistan,	 and
allowing	the	Americans	to	establish	their	bases	in
Central	Asia.	Another	 unpleasant	 aspect	 of	 his
policies	 at	 this	 time	 was	 the	 rejection	 of	 our
military	 bases	 in	 Cam	 Rahn
[285]
	 and	 Cuba.
Although	though	those	were	obviously	erroneous
and	 misguided	 decisions,	 they	 did	 not	 have
serious	repercussions,	and	Putin	set	out	to	make
amends	 almost	 immediately	 afterwards.	A	 new
project	in	Cuba	is	already	underway,	under	which
Russia	 re-established	 cooperation	 by	 delivering
arms	after	a	protracted	break.	The	business	with
Washington	naturally	failed	to	get	off	the	ground
and	  everything	  went	  back	  to	  normal.
Washington’s	stated	intention	to	construct	anti-
ballistic	missile	(ABM)	sites	in	Poland	and	the
Czech	 Republic,	 as	 well	 as	 NATO’s	 consistent
expansion	eastwards,	made	any	further	progress
along	  the	  pro-American	  course	  almost

impossible.
The	Labour	That	Putin	Failed	to	Perform
The	Second	Entry	in	the	Balance	of	Putin’s	Rule:
Losses	and	Disadvantages
In	my	article	about	his	twelve	accomplishments,	I
described	 the	 remaining	 six	 labours	 that	 Putin
faced.	The	most	crucial	was	the	seventh	labour,
which	was	to	follow	the	first	six	labours	to	their
logical	  conclusion.	  This	  meant	  tightly
intertwining	  the	  Caucasus	  with	  Russia
geopolitically	 and	 ideologically;	 creating	 an
imperial	 system	 that	 combines	 strategic
centralism	and	democratic	self-governance	at	the
grassroots	 level;	 following	 an	 independent	 and
effective	 foreign	 policy	 course;	 developing	 a
national	ideology;	finalising	the	cleansing	of	the
oligarchy	and	stopping	corruption;	and	embarking
on	the	creation	of	supranational	political	entities
in	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 CIS	 (the	 Union	 State	 of

Russia	 and	 Belarus,	 the	 Customs	 Union,	 the
Eurasian	Union,	etc.).
Putin	stumbled	throughout	the	course	of	this
seventh	labour.	Putin	either	did	not	manage	or	did
not	want	to	bring	the	first	six	steps	to	the	point	of
no	return.								
The	 crucial	 thing	 here	 is	irreversibility:	 in
2008,	Putin	delegated	everything	to	his	successor,
but	everything	that	he	had	done	could	have	been
theoretically	cancelled	and	reversed	at	any	point.
This	 is	 why	 this	 successor	 was	 potentially
dangerous	for	us.	
During	 Yeltsin’s	 presidency,	 Russia	 was
rapidly	 heading	 towards	 an	 abyss.	Putin
suspended	the	collapse	through	a	colossal	effort.
Russia	 stopped	 at	 the	 last	 moment	 and	 found
itself	 at	 the	 edge.	And	Putin	left	her	there.	She
was	not	slipping	anymore,	but	she	also	did	not
step	back	and	embark	on	the	path	towards	revival.
Time	stood	still.	Why	is	this	situation	so	fragile?

Let’s	discuss	it	in	detail.
The	Fragile	Putin:	Absence	of	a	National
Ideology	and	a	Clear-cut	Strategy
The	 Russian	 authorities	 remain	 unconsolidated,
devoid	 of	 a	 common	 national	 strategy	 (besides
pointless	incantations),	and	are	not	united	under	a
clear-cut	 state-building	 or	 national	 idea.	 All
attempts	to	develop	an	ideology	with	Putin	were
either	a	flop	or	a	bluff.
There	 is	 no	 strategy	 because	 there	 is	 no
ideology	 and	 no	 common	 political	 philosophy.
The	political	elite	live	in	the	moment	according
to	the	interests	of	their	clan.	Moreover,	with	Putin
the	 authorities	 never	 realised	 the	necessity	 of
stimulating	the	proper	development	of	a	national,
historically	responsible	worldview.	Philosophical
research	and	studies	were	replaced	 by	 arbitrary
simulacra	and	political	anecdotes.	The	authorities
seem	 to	 believe	 that	 systematic	 and	 well-

structured	 thinking	 is	 a	 merely	 a	 whim,	 a
pointless	or	unattainable	luxury	not	worth	wasting
one’s	time	on.	But	this	is	an	excuse	used	by	all
mediocre	 and	 indecent	 people	 (even	 those	 who
are	indecent	to	themselves):	‘I	have	no	time	to
think.’	 No	 time	 to	 think?	 Excuse	 me,	 but	 that
means	 you	 are	 an	 animal.	 Animals	 are	 also
always	 busy	 doing	 something:	 they	 wag	 their
tails,	look	for	food,	and	meander	around	without
any	particular	direction.
Stealing	as	a	National	Idea	and	the	Absence
of	Economy
With	 the	 absence	 of	 a	 distinct	 political
philosophy,	 corruption	 becomes	the	 informal
norm.	 We	 might	 no	 longer	 be	 selling	 out	 the
interests	of	the	state	to	external	forces	(this	was
stopped	by	Putin),	but	the	state	is	being	divided
internally,	 the	 ‘patriotic’	 way	 —	 ‘patriots’
bargaining	 with	 ‘patriots’.	 The	 absence	 of	 a

national	 idea	 gave	 rise	 to	 the	 practice	 of
corruption.	 Ultimately,	 the	 thief	 mentality
became	a	national	idea	in	itself.
That	 said,	 Russia	 still	 does	 not	 have	 an
economy.	 There	 is	 economic	 growth,	 but	 no
economy.	 Putin	 nationalised	 the	 monopolistic
instruments	 used	 to	 sell	 resources,	 which	 had
previously	 belonged	 to	 the	 oligarchs.	 This	 is	 a
good	thing,	but	the	proceeds	were	not	properly
invested	 into	 the	 creation	 of	 an	 advanced,
competitive	economy.	The	industrial	sector	was
destroyed	in	the	1990s	and	never	recovered.	The
defence-industrial	 complex	 fares	 a	 little	 better,
but	 patriotic	 PR	 tactics	 disguise	 the	 permanent
shortage	 of	 financing	 for	 the	 development	 of
breakthrough	 technologies.	 Generally	 speaking,
economic	 development	 cannot	 be	 limited	 to	 a
single	 sector	 (such	 as	 defence);	 without	 the
development	 of	 the	 high	 technologies	 sector	 in
the	 general	 structure,	 achieving	 success	 in	 the

military	sphere	is	impossible.										
Putin	 repeatedly	 stressed	 the	 importance	 of
‘tech	 cities’	 and	 new	 centres	 for	 technological
development,	 but	 nothing	 specific,	 with	 the
exception	   of	   Yudashkin’s
[286]
	   posh
nanotechnology	military	uniform	that	apparently
caused	  entire	  military	  units	  to	  catch
pneumonia,
[287]
	 has	 been	 accomplished.	 The
Skolkovo	 Innovation	 Centre	 project,
[288]
	 which
infatuated	 Medvedev	 for	 four	 years,	 has	 yet	 to
properly	 kick	 off,	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 the
project’s	entire	budget	has	already	been	spent.
Absence	of	Social	Policy	and	the	Schism	of
the	Elites
From	the	patriotic	standpoint,	Putin’s	loyalty	to
liberal	 economic	 theory	 has	 always	 been	 his
serious	 drawback.	 For	 eight	 years,	 the	 ultra-
liberal	Gräf,	Kudrin	and	Nabiullina
[289]
	have	been
in	 charge	 of	 the	 government’s	 economic	 bloc.

Liberalism	is	an	antithesis	of	social	orientation,
and	therefore	‘national	projects’	were	devised	to
satisfy	social	expectations.	They	were	conceived
as	 PR	 support	 for	 Putin’s	 successor.	 The	 ideas
behind	 these	 ‘national	 projects’	 were	 solid,	 but
the	 results	 of	 their	 implementation	 are
controversial:	there	is	no	distinct	social	strategy,
just	 populist	 slogans	 and	 certain	 helpful	 but
unsystematic	 steps.	 Take,	 for	 instance,	 the
monetisation	of	benefits	or	the	former	healthcare
minister	 Zurabov,
[290]
	 who,	 after	 resigning
(something	 which	 the	 entire	 country	 had	 been
begging	 for)	 was	 appointed	 ‘advisor	 to	 the
President’	and	sent	to	Ukraine.
The	 absence	 of	 a	 national	 ideology	 and
rampant	corruption	automatically	led	to	a	split	of
the	 elites	 into	 rival	 clans.	 These	 clans	 wage
oligarchic	 wars	 on	 one	 another	 for	 chunks	 of
property.	They	have	stopped	using	political	and
media	 resources	 in	 their	 squabbles	 (the

Parliament	and	the	media	are	strictly	controlled
by	 the	 Kremlin),	 but	 otherwise	 these	 conflicts
have	not	been	ended.	The	line-up	of	major	players
has	changed	a	bit:	some	have	been	marginalised,
others	removed.	New,	‘patriotic’	semi-oligarchs
emerged	 out	 of	 the	 enforcement	 agencies,	 but
many	have	remained	in	place	since	the	Yeltsin
era.	They	still	fight	to	the	death	to	preserve	their
interests.
They	 have	 recognised	 Putin’s	 authority	 as	 a
fact,	but	the	future	of	this	authority	is	uncertain:
the	 oligarchs	 are	 too	 tough	 and	 greedy	 to	 be
guided	 by	 purely	 moral	 principles.	As	 soon	 as
Putin	loosens	his	hold	on	them,	the	cards	will	be
reshuffled	 and	 their	 zones	 of	 influence
immediately	redistributed.
Russia’s	Weakness	in	Her	Foreign	Policy
An	analysis	of	Putin’s	actions	in	the	international
arena	demonstrates	that,	in	spite	of	all	his	tough

rhetoric,	Putin	 failed	 to	 resolve	 most	 important
geopolitical	issues	in	Russia’s	favour	(except	for
the	 Sochi	 Olympics	 and	 the	 2018	 FIFA	 World
Cup).	In	the	post-Soviet	space,	Russia,	in	spite	of
all	her	efforts,	failed	in	every	respect.	The	anti-
Russian	 regime	 in	 Georgia	 has	 only	 grown
stronger.	The	‘Orange	Revolution’	in	Ukraine	has
won	and	prevailed	over	the	‘Party	of	the	West’
(which	 had,	 in	 turn,	 betrayed	 Moscow)	 to	 the
extent	that	the	latter	does	not	much	differ	from
the	 ‘orange.’	 The	 Union	 State	 of	 Russia	 and
Belarus	would	remain	on	paper	if	it	weren’t	for
the	new	initiative	to	create	the	Eurasian	Union,
which	exists	only	as	a	declaration.
Despite	 Moscow’s	 protests	 and	 alternative
proposals,	American	military	facilities,	including
proposals	 for	 ABM	 bases,	 have	 appeared	 in
Poland,	 the	 Czech	 Republic,	 Bulgaria	 and
Romania.	 The	Atlanticists	 triumphed	 in	 Europe
(Sarkozy,	 then	 Hollande	 and	 Merkel).	 The

Americans	 and	 Europeans	 recognised	 the
independence	of	Kosovo,	ignoring	our	protests	in
the	UN.	They	bombed	Libya	and	are	threatening
Syria	 and	 Iran.	 In	 short,	Russia	 failed	 to
effectively	resist	the	practical	steps	being	taken	to
establish	 a	 unipolar	 world.	 Russia’s	 energy
potential	 is	 genuine,	 but	 in	 the	 contemporary
world	 economy,	 the	 financial	 and	 technological
sectors	 matter	 more	 than	 the	 natural	 resources
provided	mostly	by	Third	World	countries.	And
even	the	energy	sector	has	run	into	some	trouble:
the	  inspections	  of	  Gazprom’s	  European
subsidiaries	 in	 September	 2011	 are	 hardly	 a
friendly	measure	by	the	‘grateful	consumers’	of
natural	gas.
[291]
The	UN	is	becoming	increasingly	useless,	and
all	Russian	efforts	to	appeal	to	countries	all	over
the	world	to	consider	moral	issues	in	dealing	with
international	 problems	 have	 proven	 futile.	 Big-
time	policy	relies	on	a	key	instrument	—	force

and	will,	which	Russia	desperately	lacked	in	the
Putin	 era,	 let	 alone	 during	 the	 four	 years	 of
Medvedev’s	presidency.
The	 above-mentioned	 points	 are	 the	 critical
remarks	of	a	conservative	patriot.	Obviously,	the
liberal	 Westernists	 will	 come	 up	 with	 reverse
criticisms,	 although	 our	 assessments	 may
coincide	in	some	respects:	they,	too,	criticise	the
absence	 of	 a	 stable	 economy	 and	 growing
corruption.	 Western	 critics	 will	 also	 complain
about	the	existence	of	‘authoritarian	tendencies’,
‘mere	 simulation	 of	 democratic	 procedures’,
‘limited	 freedom	 of	 speech,’	 ‘discriminating
purges	of	certain	representatives	of	big	business’
and	‘bureaucratic	raids’,	‘the	mysterious	death	of
Litvinenko’
[292]
	 (and	 other	 figures)	 and	 the
‘deterioration	of	relations	with	the	West’	—	in
short,	the	typical	compendium	of	liberal	critique,
which	 we,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 consider	 to	 be	 the
advantages	and	achievements	of	Putin’s	rule,	with

no	irony	intended.	We	view	these	trends	as	the
positive	results	of	the	eradication	of	the	‘damned
1990s’.	 But	 even	 if	 we	 dismiss	 the	 liberals’
arguments,	an	unbiased	analysis	of	the	country’s
future	prospects	in	2012	reveals	a	fairly	gloomy
picture.
Defending	the	‘status	quo’	is	futile	as	of	today.
It	 would	 mean	 consciously	 defending	 a	 social
illness	and	a	rush	toward	an	imminent	end.	But
the	principal	question	today	is:	does	Putin	himself
realise	 the	 urgency	 of	 the	 situation	 and	 the
seriousness	of	the	maturing	crisis?
The	Crisis	of	Representation
The	inadequacy	of	the	ruling	elite,	the	absence	of
a	 guiding	 ideology,	 the	 uncertainty	 and
controversial	nature	of	Russia’s	political	strategy:
all	of	these	points	call	the	legitimacy	of	Russia’s
authorities	into	question,	leaving	Russia	between
a	 rock	 and	 a	 hard	 place.	 The	 main	 problem	 of

contemporary	Russia	is	the	growing	discrepancy
between	 the	 actual	 state	 of	 society	 and	 the
political	elite’s	idea	of	this	state.	The	masses	are
confused,	while	the	elites	exude	‘stability’.	The
people	are	outraged	by	rampant	corruption	while
the	elites	benefit	from	it,	which	further	increases
the	huge	gap	between	the	rich	and	the	poor.
Ethnic	tensions	and	uncontrolled	immigration
have	reached	a	boiling	point,	but	the	authorities
continue	to	hope	for	a	civil	society,	tolerance	and
multiculturalism	 (which	 are	 already	 being
rejected	in	Europe).	The	people	worship	Stalin,
and	dream	about	a	great	Russia	and	social	justice,
but	 the	 authorities	 have	 launched	 a	 ‘de-
Stalinisation’	 campaign,	 professing	 liberalism
and	 the	 principle	 of	 ‘every	 man	 for	 himself’,
boasting	about	a	closer	resemblance	to	the	US	and
NATO	countries.	The	elite	complain	that	they	are
‘not	happy	with	the	people’,	claiming	that	‘the
human	 material	 is	 of	 very	 low	 quality’.	 	 	 The

people	respond	in	kind.	A	sense	of	alienation	is
growing.					
The	state	has	traditionally	been	the	supreme
value	 of	 the	 Russian	 people.	 Without	 a	 strong
state,	the	rights	and	freedoms	of	Russian	citizens
will	not	make	any	political	or	social	sense.	This
hypothesis	has	been	the	basis	of	the	notion	of	a
‘controlled’,	 ‘sovereign’	 democracy,	 which
implied	 that	 Western	 democratic	 standards	 are
secondary	 to	 the	 establishment	 of	 Russian
sovereignty.	 The	 compensation	 for	 ‘suspending
democracy’	 must	 be	 a	 tangible	 and	 palpable
success	in	a	project	aimed	at	creating	a	stronger
state.	But	the	project	of	strengthening	of	the	state,
which	 drove	 the	 political	 reforms	 of	 the	 early
2000s,	has	been	curtailed.	Today,	the	‘suspension
of	democracy’	is	not	justified	at	all,	and	this	leads
to	disappointment	in	the	existing	political	course
not	only	among	the	radical	pro-Western	liberals
(who	 just	 can’t	 get	 enough	 democracy),	 but

among	the	pro-state	patriots	as	well.
The	Growing	Deficit	in	Legitimacy
We	 are	 currently	 undergoing	 a	 crisis	 of
legitimacy	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 Russian	 attitudes
towards	 our	 political	 authorities.	Legitimacy	 is
the	 informal	 approval	 by	 the	 majority	 of	 the
policy	that	the	authorities	have	chosen	to	follow.
Legitimacy	is	the	indicator	of	the	general	state	of
society	and	the	collective	opinion	of	the	majority.
Legality	is	the	compliance	of	the	political	regime
with	the	existing	legal	norms.	During	the	USSR’s
last	years,	the	political	regime	was	quite	legal,
but	was	losing	its	legitimacy.	The	Yeltsin	regime,
which	 had	 to	 attack	 Parliament	 in	 order	 to
strengthen	 its	 positions,
[293]
	 never	 became	 fully
legitimate.	 The	 oligarchs	 ruled	 the	 country	 and
ethnic	and	religious	tensions	were	rampant	in	the
Caucasus.	 We	 almost	 lost	 Chechnya.	 Vladimir
Putin	saved	Russia	as	a	state	and	strengthened	its

sovereignty.	 These	 actions	 made	 his	 first	 two
terms	both	legal	and	legitimate.	In	2008,	Putin
used	up	his	‘legitimacy	capital’	in	the	election	of
Dmitry	Medvedev.	At	this	point,	the	legitimacy
of	Russia’s	authorities	changed.
In	 August	 2008,	 President	 Medvedev	 acted
decisively	 and	 boldly	 in	 the	 critical	 situation
caused	by	the	Georgian	attack	on	Tskhinvali,
[294]
preventing	 genocide	 in	 Ossetia	 and	 defending
Russian	 interests	 in	 spite	 of	 pressure	from	 the
West	and	by	the	internal	network	of	its	agents.
But	 this	 event	 was	 only	 a	 minor	 episode,	 and
Medvedev	 stuck	 to	 the	 liberal	 course	 when	 it
came	to	most	other	issues.	He	surrounded	himself
with	pro-Western	advisors	and	experts,	unpopular
oligarchs,	 catered	 to	 the	 US	 and	 Obama	 and
severely	 aggravated	 relations	 with	 Belarus.	 The
modernisation	 project	 that	 he	 claimed	 to	 have
embarked	 upon	 involved	 the	 destruction	 of
Russia’s	identity	and	the	replication	of	Western

social	standards.	The	national	projects	that	he	had
handled	 prior	 to	 his	 presidency	 gradually
dwindled.	The	‘de-Stalinisation’	project	proved	to
be	totally	irrelevant,	because	the	memories	of	the
Soviet	period	—	social	security,	leaps	in	industry
and	its	international	achievements	—	became	a
nostalgic	ideal	for	the	masses,	standing	in	sharp
contrast	with	the	injustices,	the	gap	between	the
rich	and	the	poor	and	the	cultural	deterioration
that	 has	 marked	 the	 post-Soviet	 period.	 The
opening	 of	 a	 giant	 monument	 to	 Yeltsin	 by
Medvedev	 in	 Yekaterinburg	 and	 a	 smaller
monument	 to	 Yegor	 Gaidar	 in	 Moscow
symbolically	 recreated	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 the
1990s,	a	period	of	time	that	was	perceived	by	the
Russian	public	to	be	completely	illegitimate.
The	 ultra-liberals,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 also
lacked	 faith	 in	 Medvedev,	 because	 they
considered	him	to	be	overly	dependent	on	Putin.
So,	beginning	in	2008,	the	gap	between	the	elite

and	the	masses,	and	between	the	authorities	and
the	people,	started	to	widen.
The	Paradox	of	Modernisation
The	 modernisation	 project	 was	 President
Medvedev’s	hobby	horse.	If	we	are	to	accept	the
axiom	that	Russia	must	develop	in	line	with	the
West	 (a	 largely	 disputable	 thesis),	 then
historically	we	are	now	faced	with	the	necessity
to	 create	 a	 bourgeois	 nation.	 The	 nations	 in
Europe	first	appeared	in	the	modern	era,	coming
into	 existence	 alongside	 bourgeois	 reforms	 and
the	Third	Estate’s
[295]
	rise	to	power.	The	idea	of	a
nation	 is	 inextricably	 linked	 with	 capitalism,
industrialisation	 and	 the	 rejection	 of	 the
traditional	 collectivist	 mentality.	 A	 nation	 is
based	on	the	principle	of	individual	citizenship.
That	 said,	 Ernest	 Gellner
[296]
	 and	 Benedict
Anderson
[297]
	 have	 illustrated	 that	 nations	 are
created	artificially,	and	nationalism	serves	as	the

main	instrument	by	which	this	is	accomplished.
Russia,	in	spite	of	having	the	outward	signs	of
an	industrial	society,	is	still	a	largely	traditional
society	with	an	archaic	and	collectivist	mentality.
If	we	develop	in	accordance	with	the	European
model,	 then	 we	 must	 build	 Russia	 into	 a
bourgeois	 nation	 along	 with	 all	 its	 essential
attributes:	individual	identity	and	the	formation
of	the	egoistic	Homo	oeconomicus,
[298]
	as	well	as
the	 mandatory	 eradication	 and	 neutralisation	 of
all	 original	 ethnic	 cultures.	 In	 this	 case,	 the
bourgeois	nation	would	be	called	a	Russian	nation
and	the	instrument	of	its	creation	would	have	to
be	 Russian	 nationalism.	 And	 since	 European
nations	had	existed	for	several	centuries	before
Europeans	began	switching	to	the	model	of	a	civil
society,	the	Russian	nation	will	supposedly	face	a
long	 period	 of	 similar	 evolution	 (a	 century,	 at
least).	In	addition,	similar	to	European	nations,	its
nationalism	would	have	to	be	its	principal	guiding

ideology.	 Therefore,	 modernisation	 in	 our
historical	context	can	mean	only	one	thing:	the
creation	of	a	bourgeois	Russian	nation	backed	by
Russian	nationalism.
But	here	we	come	across	a	contradiction.	The
Western	 countries	 are	 trying	 to	 overcome	 their
national	 boundaries	 and	 create	 a	 civil	 society.
This	is	the	reason	why	their	nationalism	in	all	its
various	 forms	 is	 subject	 to	 eradication	 and
dismantling:	it	has	already	had	its	day.	It	appears
that	we	are	at	different	historical	stages:	we	are
facing	the	creation	of	a	bourgeois	nation	while	the
West	is	moving	towards	the	next	social	model,	a
civil	 society.	 We	 may	 fall	 victim	 to	 the
‘Bolshevist’	 temptation	 to	 accelerate	 the
historical	process	and	skip	a	logically	necessary
stage	 of	 social	 development.	 Dmitry	 Medvedev
(along	with	his	advisors)	fell	for	this	trap	with	his
version	of	modernisation:	he	tried	to	create	a	civil
society	in	one	leap,	bypassing	the	necessary	stage

of	creating	a	nation.	This	attempt	resulted	in	a
modernisation	flop,	a	crisis	in	representation	(the
elites’	idea	of	society	does	not	reflect	the	actual
state	 of	 things)	 and,	 consequently,	 the
delegitimisation	 of	 the	 authorities	 and	 their
political	course.
Since	the	path	towards	modernisation	has	been
established,	 nationalism	 is	 inevitable.	 But
Medvedev	 and	 his	 circle	 rejected	 nationalism,
along	with	the	figure	of	Stalin	who	had	made	a
decisive	 (albeit	 forceful)	 step	 towards	 Russia’s
industrialisation.	And,	finally,	any	modernisation
in	 Russia	 was	 always	 forced	 from	 above,	 by
breaking	 the	 resistance	 of	 the	 masses.
Nationalism,	Stalinism	and	authoritarianism	are
the	 three	 main	 reference	 points	 for	 Russian
modernisation	at	its	current	historical	stage,	and
if	we	don’t	employ	all	three,	modernisation	will
remain	an	empty	phrase.

End	of	a	Political	Cycle:	Beyond
the	Grey	Pole
The	Dawn	in	Boots	and	Putin’s	Legitimacy
Yeltsin’s	 power	 in	 the	 1990s	 was	 politically
illegitimate.	What	he	and	his	entourage	did	was
not	supported	by	the	majority	of	the	population
(liberal	reforms,	‘shock	therapy’,	etc.).	It	was	a
dictatorship	of	the	liberal	pro-Western	elite,	the
oligarchs,	and	a	tiny	number	of	top	government
officials.	The	people	generally	disapproved,	but
were	 not	 capable	 of	 protesting.	 The	 country,
nevertheless,	was	on	the	brink	of	disintegration.
Putin,	who	was	initially	pushed	to	the	top	through
PR	 campaigns	 and	 powerful	 administrative
resources,	turned	out	to	be	the	one	who	everyone
had	 been	 waiting	 for.	 Compared	 to	Yeltsin,	 he
was	 a	 godsend.	 Putin	 initiated	 a	 number	 of
reforms	to	the	benefit	of	the	people.	He	prevented
the	 disintegration	 of	 Russia,	 conducted	 the

victorious	  second	  Chechen	  campaign,
strengthened	 the	 vertical	 power,	 exiled	 or
imprisoned	the	most	notorious	oligarchs,	started
negotiating	with	the	West	in	a	harsher	manner,	re-
established	the	national	anthem,	threw	the	ultra-
liberals	 out	 of	 politics,	 introduced	 the	 federal
districts,	gave	the	green	light	to	the	integration	of
the	 post-Soviet	 space,	 took	 the	 non-conforming
TV	and	radio	channels	away	from	the	oligarchs,
insisted	on	removing	the	notion	of	‘sovereignty’
from	the	local	legislations	of	the	subjects	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 subjects,	 enhanced	 the
positions	of	the	siloviki	in	power,	and	established
appointment	 procedures	 for	 the	 governors.	 All
this,	 and	 especially	 the	 sharp	 contrast	 with
Yeltsin,	made	Putin	fully	legitimate	in	the	early
2000s.	He	found	the	right	balance	between	partial
compliance	with	both	the	pro-Western	oligarchic
elites	of	the	1990s	(in	their	moderate	sector)	and
the	masses,	who	were	hoping	for	great	power,	a

tough	 stance	 and	 order.	 Public	 support	 was
evident:	 after	Yeltsin’s	 effectively	 anti-Russian
and	 comprador	 course,	 Putin	 was	 perceived
positively.	 Thus	 Putin’s	 positive	 ratings	 were
established.	Putin	satisfied	the	majority;	he	was	a
compromise	 who	 met	 the	 requirements	 of	 a
particular	political	period.
In	the	first	stage,	Putin	was	opposed	only	by
the	 representatives	 of	 the	 ultra-liberal	 and	 pro-
Western	forces	(‘the	dissenters’)	financed	by	the
US	and	the	exiled	oligarchs.	This	set	the	political
paradigm	of	the	2000s.	Putin	made	a	90-degree
turn	 away	 from	 the	Yeltsin	 course.	 Not	 a	 180-
degree	turn,	but	a	90-degree	turn.	He	did	not	turn
in	another	direction,	he	stopped	the	process.	He
froze	it.
The	2008	elections	served	as	the	final	straw.
Putin	 still	 had	 room	 to	 return	 to	 his	 previous
course,	 and	 he	 could	 have	 enhanced	 his
legitimacy	 with	 the	 masses	 (simultaneously

weakening	his	legitimacy	with	the	elites	and	the
West)	if	he	had	remained	President	for	another
term.	 He	 would	 have	 been	 the	 Russian
Lukashenko,	loved	by	the	masses,	frightening	to
the	elite	and	hated	by	the	West.	At	the	very	least
he	could	have	appointed	someone	who	stuck	to
similar	policies	as	his	successor,	but	he	resolved
to	 take	 the	 alternative	 route	 and	 delegate	 his
powers	to	Dmitry	Medvedev.
Medvedev’s	 political	 image	 was	 designed	 to
appease	liberals,	the	West	and	the	oligarchy.	In
order	to	highlight	this	point,	he	became	the	head
of	 the	 board	 of	 trustees	 of	 the	 Institute	 of
Contemporary	Development	(ICD),
[299]
	which	was
established	on	the	basis	of	the	‘oligarchs’	trade
union’	 and	 the	 RUIE,	 and	 was	 headed	 by	 Igor
Yurgens
[300]
	(the	‘voice	of	the	oligarchs’)	and	a
pro-Western	 ultra-liberal	 even	 prior	 to	 his
election.	It	is	obvious	that	Putin	decided	to	use
these	four	years	(2008-2012)	as	a	buffer	period

for	improving	relations	with	the	West	(either	in	a
genuine	sense	or	only	allegedly)	and	as	a	‘return
to	 the	 1990s’	 (partial	 or	 in	 full).	 Overall,
Medvedev’s	presidency	meant	a	partial	reversal
of	 Putin’s	 course.	 It	 was	 a	 transition	 from	 the
preservation	 of	 the	 status	 quo	 and	 ‘sovereign
democracy’	   to	   ‘modernisation’	   and
‘democratisation’.
Almost	three	years,	from	2008	to	the	end	of
2010,	were	spent	on	the	preparation	and	solution
of	merely	technical	issues,	and	it	was	clear	that
the	Putin	cycle	was	over	by	the	end	of	2010.	For	a
period	of	time,	Medvedev’s	steps	to	appease	the
West	could	have	been	reversed.	They	could	have
passed	 for	 a	 farce	 or	 a	 distraction,	 especially
given	 the	 fact	 that,	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 his
presidency	in	2008,	Russia’s	decisive	entry	into
Georgia	easily	passed	for	a	continuation	of	Putin-
style	politics.	But	his	refusal	to	supply	S-300s
[301]
to	Iran	(Russia’s	principal	strategic	partner),	his

support	for	sanctions	against	Iran	and	especially
the	 signing	 of	 the	 New	 START	 agreement
[302]
(which	 caused	 irreparable	 harm	 to	 Russia’s
defences)	demonstrated	that	things	took	a	turn	for
the	 worst,	 and	 the	 Gorbachev-Yeltsin	 line	 in
Russian-American	relations	resurfaced.
Three	Russias:	The	Grey,	the	Orange,	the
Black
In	contemporary	Russia	there	are	three	political
zones	which	can	conventionally	be	called	Russia
1,	Russia	2	and	Russia	3.								
Russia	 1	 is	 a	 model	 of	 the	 preservation	 of
Putin’s	 compromise:	 the	 continued	 balancing
between	the	elites	and	the	masses,	between	the
West	 and	 national	 interests,	 and	 between
conservatism	 and	 modernisation.	 Russia	 1	 is
‘putinism’	in	a	broad	sense.	It	can	be	referred	to
symbolically	as	a	grey	pole,	the	Russia	of	Putin,
of	the	vertical	power,	a	specific	crossbreed	of	the

Family	and	the	Peter	Guys,	‘Russian	patriotism’
and	 ‘gaidaronomics’,	 Orthodox	 bankers	 and
unorthodox	oligarchs.	It	includes	both	the	Munich
speech	 and	 Medvedev	 with	 his	 Institute	 of
Contemporary	 Development,	 complicity	 in	 the
murder	 of	 Gaddafi	 and	 the	 Skolkovo	 thefts.
[303]
Russia	1	has	been,	until	recently,	managed	by	the
Kremlin’s	 grey	 cardinal	 Vladislav	 Surkov,	 the
chief	 architect	 of	 its	 political	 and	 ideological
structure	 who	 was	 responsible	 for	 emasculating
both	the	liberal	and	patriotic	substance	of	Russian
politics.	He	was	a	postmodernist	in	a	Byzantine
vein.
Until	recently,	Russia	1	has	been	the	dominant
force	in	the	country’s	political	system.	It	was	the
golden	mean	located	between	the	orange	pole	and
the	black	pole.	Russia	1	includes	United	Russia,
the	 pro-Kremlin	 youth	 organisations,	 the
moderation	of	the	informational	sphere,	and	the
community	of	experts	—	in	other	words,	Russia’s

entire	domestic	policy	that	is	controlled	by	the
Kremlin.	The	emergence	of	the	power	tandem
[304]
in	 2008	 split	 the	 grey	 pole.	 Medvedev	 clearly
settled	between	the	grey	and	the	orange,	in	spite
of	the	fact	that	he	had	avoided	crossing	this	line
in	the	past:	he	did	not	release	Khodorkovsky,	he
did	not	sanction	the	creation	of	a	new	political
party,	and	he	did	not	grant	the	‘dissenters’	free
access	to	the	federal	media.	Medvedev’s	gradual
strengthening	as	President	meant	a	drift	from	the
grey	to	the	orange.	Its	horizon	is	easy	to	predict:
the	 territorial	 disintegration	 of	 Russia,	 the
escalation	 of	 civil	 conflicts,	 a	 return	 of	 the
liberals,	 and	 a	 sharp	 decline	 in	 Russia’s
importance	in	the	international	arena	—	in	short,
a	complete	return	to	the	1990s.
The	 second	 pole,	 Russia	 2,	 is	 unadulterated
Westernism,	liberalism	and	Yeltsin-style	reforms.
This	pole	attracts	American	political	protégés	in
Russia,	 the	 exiled	 oligarchs,	 the	 ‘implacable

opposition’	 (the	 ‘dissenters’)	 and	 the	 liberal
power	 sector.	 Figures	 like	 Yurgens,	 Voloshin,
Pavlovsky,
[305]
	 Gontmakher,	 Chubais,	 Budberg,
Navalny,
[306]
	 Nemtsov,	 and	 so	 on	 fit	 the	 mould
perfectly.
The	 focus	 of	 Russia	 2	 is	 on	 modernisation,
democratisation,	 closer	 ties	 to	 the	 West,
globalisation	 and	 the	 dismantling	 of	 Putin’s
vertical	 power.	 The	 majority	 of	 the	 Russian
economic	and	political	elite	formed	in	the	Yeltsin
era	 sympathises	 with	 this	 approach	 or	 actively
supports	it.	The	radio	station	Ekho	Moskvy	shows
Russia	2	in	crystal-clear	form.	This	is	the	orange
pole.	There	is	a	distinct	liberal	segment	in	Russia
1	that	consists	of	Medvedev,	Voloshin,	Chubais,
the	 leaders	 of	 the	 mass	 media	 and	 the	 experts.
This	liberal	segment	is	slowly	transforming	into
‘orangism’.	For	example,	Andrei	Illarionov,	after
serving	 as	 Putin’s	 advisor,	 found	 himself
alongside	Kasparov	and	Kasyanov	(who	himself

was	Putin’s	Prime	Minister).	This	is	a	common
front	whose	members	share	a	similar	outlook	on
the	destiny	of	Russia.	The	liberals	that	remain	in
Putin’s	entourage	can	be	designated	as	‘spies	who
keep	an	eye	on	Putin’.	They	prefer	to	work	for	the
West	from	the	inside	and	not	from	the	ranks	of
the	opposition,	but	as	they	get	periodically	ousted
from	Russia	1,	they	easily	join	Russia	2.
Russia	 3	 is	 the	 far	 less	 ideologically	 and
organisationally	 consistent	 position	 of	 the
Russian	 masses	 who	 work	 toward	 establishing
order,	 a	 strong	 state,	 social	 guarantees
(socialism),	 nationalism	 and	 patriotism.	 This
political	 sector	 reacts	 very	 painfully	 to	 the
westernisation	 of	 Russian	 society.	 Russia	 3	 is
represented	 by	 a	 large	 social	 base,	 but	 there	 is
virtually	no	political	representation.	This	position
manifests	 itself	 in	 the	 Rodina	 party,
[307]
	 the
Russian	Marches,
[308]
	the	Zavtra
[309]
	newspaper	or
in	 the	 gatherings	 of	 football	 fans	 on	 Manège

square.
[310]
	This	is	the	black	pole.	Nobody	tries	to
appease	 Russia	 3;	 the	 grey	 continues	 to	 put
pressure	on	it,	attempting	to	split	it	up,	tame,	or
weaken	it.	The	authorities	have	spawned	multiple
simulacra,	 operated	 from	 the	 Kremlin.	 But	 the
importance	of	Russia	3	(as	a	source	of	political
legitimisation)	 is	 constantly	 growing.	 It	 is
difficult	to	predict	what	organisational	forms	it
will	transform	into.	The	existing	political	parties,
which	could	claim	to	play	this	part,	are	paralysed
from	the	inside	and	do	not	play	a	significant	role
in	this	process.	Their	management	is	integrated
into	the	grey	zone	and	directly	depends	on	it.	The
creation	of	new	and	efficient	patriotic	movements
will	not	be	permitted	by	the	authorities.	Today
there	 is	 no	 organisational	 potential	 and	 no
outspoken	leaders	in	this	area.
The	black	pole	is	confused,	disjointed	and	far
from	 any	 notion	 of	 consolidation.	 It	 is	 at	 best
capable	 of	 spontaneous	 protests	 (like	 the

gatherings	 on	 Manège	 square)	 instead	 of	 well-
planned	initiatives.	It	operates	through	flash	mobs
and	 the	 systematic	 sabotage	 of	 the	 political
discourse,	not	only	through	direct	opposition	but
also	through	indifference	and	passivity.	When	it
comes	to	legitimate	politics,	the	representatives
from	 this	 sector	 cannot	 compete	 with	 the
technologies	 of	 the	 grey	 (whose	 use	 bribery,
deceit,	media	campaigns,	psychological	methods,
understatement,	defamation,	and	so	on	—	along
with	direct	force).	Besides,	there	is	no	external
support	for	Russia	3.	If	only	for	the	purpose	of
aggravating	 the	 situation	 (in	 a	 limited	 scope),
certain	sectors	of	the	grey	zone	can	be	included	in
the	overall	structure	of	the	‘dissenters’,	but	only
under	 the	 supervision	 and	 strict	 control	 of	 the
orange	 pole.	 Nevertheless,	 the	 amount	 of
sentiment	of	this	sort	in	society	will	constantly
grow,	which	will	become	the	most	important,	if
not	crucial,	factor.	The	huge	electoral	success	of

Rodina	in	2003	is	an	outstanding	example.	Some
of	the	patriots	sustained	by	the	authorities,	such
as	Nikita	Mikhalkov,
[311]
	cooperate	with	Russia	1,
but	the	other	sector,	the	street	nationalists	of	all
denominations,	 are	 getting	 closer	 to	 the	 orange
pole	 (Potkin,
[312]
	 Demushkin,
[313]
	 etc.).	 There	 is
continuity	 here	 too,	 which	 invisibly	 transforms
the	 nationalist	 stool	 pigeons,	 supervised	 by	 the
siloviki,	 into	 national	 democrats	 and	 racists
patronised	 by	 the	 spin	 doctors	 of	 the	 exiled
oligarchs	and	the	CIA	(an	important	function	here
is	  played	  by	  the	  manager	  Stanislav
Belkovsky).
[314]
And	 what	 about	 Putin?	 Putin	 is	 biding	 his
time.	It	would	be	logical	if	he	veered	towards	the
black	pole,	where	he	is	being	pushed	by	both	the
American	 politologists	 and	 by	 the	 patriots	 who
remain	loyal	to	him.	Everybody	expects	Putin	to
move	towards	Russia	3.	But	this	is	not	happening.
Putin	 is	 not	 moving	 in	 this	 direction	 and

continues	to	occupy	the	same	space,	in	the	middle
of	the	grey	zone,	so	there	is	a	discrepancy	even	in
relation	to	the	compromise	model	of	Putin’s	first
presidential	cycle.
Time	is	Up:	Reinforcement	of	the	Flanks
and	Weakening	of	the	Centre
The	 most	 important	 aspect	 is	 that,	 as	 of	 the
beginning	of	2012,	Putin	has	virtually	no	time	or
political	room	for	a	new	patriotic	gesture,	which
he	 has	 been	 postponing	 for	 many	 years.	 He
demonstrates	 his	 charisma	 and	 legitimacy	 by
refusing	to	actively	oppose	the	orange	zone.	The
entire	system	is	shifting	towards	the	orange	zone.
And	even	in	spite	of	the	fact	that	Putin	is	the	only
candidate	 representing	 the	 authorities	 in	 2012,
many	 opportunities	 have	 been	 hopelessly	 lost.
Putin’s	allegiance	to	the	grey	zone	will	not	satisfy
anyone	 in	 the	 new	 stage,	 neither	 the	 orange
(naturally)	 nor	 the	 black.	 This	 means	 that,	 in

trying	 to	 repeat	 what	 he	 managed	 to	 do	 in	 the
2000s,	Putin	will	confront	a	serious	problem:	the
context	has	changed	but	the	forms	of	his	political
thinking	 have	 remained	 the	 same.	 Putin	 has
missed	his	window	of	opportunity.
A	 process	 of	 disintegration	 in	 the	 existing
Russian	political	system	began	in	2011:	the	grey
pole	began	to	shrink,	and	the	orange	and	the	black
(Russia	2	and	Russia	3)	were	gaining	momentum.
Russia	 2	 started	 to	 play	 up	 to	 Medvedev	 in
earnest,	associating	its	own	autonomous	political
course	with	him.	As	2012	approached,	support	for
this	 segment	 from	 the	 West	 grew	 rapidly.	 The
creation	 of	 a	 centre	 of	 power	 which	 could
synchronise	this	activity	seemed	to	be	underway.
End	of	a	Cycle
The	 logic	 of	 events	 forces	 us	 to	 take	 our
fascinated	 eyes	 off	 the	 top	 officials	 and	 the
opportunistic	riffraff	serving	them,	and	look	the

other	 way:	 at	 the	 people,	 history,	 society,	 the
logic	of	the	principal	international	tendencies	in
geopolitics,	ethno-sociology,the	transformation	of
identity,	postmodernism	and	the	global	scale	of
the	crisis	of	mankind	(not	only	economic,	but	the
crisis	 in	 values,	 culture,	 and	 anthropology	 as
well),	as	well	as	at	the	problems	of	hegemony	and
counter-hegemony.
Russia	 is	 part	 of	 the	 world,	 and	 everything
about	this	world	is	wrong.	Unsurprisingly,	things
are	not	well	in	our	country	either.	 We	 need	 to
broaden	 the	 horizons	 of	 our	 thought.	 Some
problems	don’t	have	easy	solutions	because	these
problems	are	complicated	by	their	very	nature.	A
technical	malfunction	can	be	fixed	by	technical
means,	but	historical	problems	cannot	be	solved
in	the	same	manner.	You	cannot	avoid	politics:	if
we	decide	not	to	deal	with	politics,	it	means	we
will	be	reduced	to	voluntary	slavery.	By	refusing
to	lead	a	political	existence,	we	delegate	power	to

the	 first	 comer	 who	 doesn’t	 turn	 away	 from
politics	 as	 we	 do.	 But	 politics	 should	 now	 be
sought	in	other	areas.
The	domination	of	the	grey	zone	has	run	dry.
We	should	look	beyond	its	limits.	The	grey	zone
is	coming	apart,	and	this	process	is	irreversible.
Russia	is	nearing	the	end	of	Putin’s	cycle,	and
Putin’s	 return	 will	 not	 automatically	 solve
anything.	 Putin’s	 return	 will	 bring	 about	 new
questions	instead	of	providing	us	with	answers.
We	 need	 to	 use	 our	 historical	 imagination,
because	our	old	tactics	are	no	longer	working.
Phantom	Russia
Russia	 1	 is	 Putin’s	 personal	 formula.	 It	 was
founded	at	a	time	when	Yeltsin’s	Russia	was	on
the	brink	of	a	political	and	personal	crisis	in	the
political	 authorities.	 As	 Putin	 emerged,	 he
removed	 the	 principal	 problems.	 He	removed
them	but	did	not	solve	them,	transferring	all	these

processes	to	a	different	plane.	The	origin	of	the
problems	 of	 the	 pre-Putin	 period	 lay	 in	the
directly	 opposing	 interests	 and	 mentality	 of	 the
nouveau	  riche	comprador	 elites	 versus	 the
patriotically-	and	socially-oriented	masses.
Putin	was	brought	to	power	by	the	consensus
of	the	Yeltsin	elite:	liberal	democrats,	oligarchs,
media	magnates;	in	short,	by	the	‘Family’.	But,	at
the	 same	 time,	 politically	 his	 emergence	 was
presented	as	a	step	towards	the	masses	and	as	an
answer	to	their	demands.	The	intuition	of	some
genius	spin	doctor	sensed	in	Putin	a	point	for	a
total	compromise	within	Yeltsin’s	society,	a	point
where	 the	 elites	 and	 the	 masses	 perfectly
balanced	each	other,	a	place	of	dead	calm	in	the
eye	 of	 a	 hurricane.	 Putin	 satisfied	 the	 elites
(liberalism,	 democracy)	 and	 the	 masses
(patriotism,	a	tough	stance)	simultaneously.	This
simultaneous	satisfaction,	when	‘the	lion	and	the
lamb	shall	lie	down	together’	gave	birth	to	Russia

2.	During	all	four	years	of	his	first	term	society,
apart	from	the	marginal	lunatic	 fringe,	 enjoyed
the	 effect	 of	 this	 conciliation.	 This	 effect
transformed	into	high	ratings.	In	doing	so,	society
illustrated	 the	 following:	 ‘We	 prefer	 the	 pause
button	 to	 be	 pressed	 permanently.	 We	 cannot
tolerate	the	contradictions	of	the	Yeltsin	period
any	 longer.’	 From	 the	 substantive	 standpoint,
Russia	1	is	a	freeze-frame,	a	screenshot	of	all	the
rhythms	 and	 energies	 that	 roared	 in	 the	 1990s,
shaking	the	country,	tormenting	the	 people	 and
their	souls.	Strictly	adhering	to	the	rules,	Putin
himself	 acted	 as	 a	 cautious	 gardener,	carefully
mixing	 test-tube,	 virtual	 patriotism	 with	 coyly
disguised	and	inconsistent	liberal	reformism.	This
style	 of	 rule	 was	 somehow	 ‘regional’,	 not
‘imperial’;	 accurate,	 punctual,	 striving	 to	 avoid
all	things	large-scale	and	radical,	all	things	truly
Russian	—	‘as	far	as	the	eye	can	see’.
First	and	foremost:	the	compromise	was	not	a

synthesis.	The	 elite	 continued	 their	 evil	 deeds:
they	were	siphoning	off	funds,	conning	the	people
and	 taking	 kickbacks.	 The	 masses	 degenerated,
listening	 to	 Petrosyan
[315]
	 and	 cosy	 patriotic
truisms,	 and	 drinking	 vodka.	 Nothing	 that	 was
promised	actually	got	done.
The	 first	 wave	 of	 problems	 with	 Russia	 1
started	in	2004,	right	in	the	middle	of	Putin’s	first
presidency.	Some	sinister	shadows	lurked	on	the
horizon	 and	 dark	 omens	 loomed	 —	 terrorist
attacks,	catastrophes,	monetisation,
Yushchenko’s
[316]
	face.	This	entire	series	of	events
coincided	with	the	increasing	external	(American)
pressure	on	Russia,	which	is	definitely	systemic
rather	that	accidental:	the	Americans	are	building
a	world	empire	on	our	dime,	strictly	according	to
schedule.	The	freeze-frame	period	ended	with	the
inauguration	 of	 Putin’s	 second	 term	 and	 was
marked	 by	 the	 murder	 of	 Akhmat	 Kadyrov	 in
May	 2004.	 Putin	 was	 supposed	 to	 offer	 our

society	an	image	of	the	future	and	to	do	it	smartly
and	 decisively.	 But	 it	 did	 not	 happen	 in	 2004.
Everything	remained	as	it	was.
An	Unsuccessful	Theatrical	Interlude
Putin’s	 entire	 second	 term	 was	 devoted	 to	 the
problem	 of	 2008.	 This	 was	 the	 year	 Putin’s
presidency	 came	 to	 an	 end,	 and	 under	 the
Constitution	no	person	could	be	elected	President
more	 than	 twice	 in	 a	 row.	 The	 idea	 was	 to
preserve	 the	 power	 and	 control	 of	 the	 country
without	 a	 direct	 confrontation	 with	 the	 West.
Various	 options	 were	 considered,	 and	 the	 most
disastrous	one	was	then	selected.	Putin	decided	to
replace	 himself	 with	 a	 loyal,	 blank	 and	 weak-
willed	administrator	who	had	a	‘liberal’	image.
His	 liberalism	 and	 lack	 of	 leadership	 qualities
warranted	unpopularity	with	the	patriotic	masses.
Liberalism	was	supposed	to	pacify	the	West	and
suspend	the	radicalisation	of	Russia	2.	In	order	to

save	himself	and	Russia	1,	Putin	decided	to	stage
a	situation	in	which	Russia	1	was	soon	about	to
turn,	consciously	and	without	additional	external
and	internal	pressure,	into	Russia	2.	According	to
the	plan,	Medvedev	could	maintain	that	he	would
remain	 for	 a	 second	 term	 and	 finalise	 the
liberalisation	 of	 Russia	 until	 the	 very	 last
moment,	conceding	to	the	West	in	every	way.	The
liberals	sensed	a	possibility	of	recoup.	Everybody
succumbed	to	it	and	everybody	was	cheated.	After
the	 announcement	 in	 the	 autumn	 of	 2011	 that
Putin	would	return,	all	the	masks	came	off.
Technically,	the	trick	worked,	but	the	time	for
serious	and	substantive	transformations	was	gone
forever.	The	disappointment	of	the	elite	and	the
masses	reached	a	critical	point.	The	four	years	of
Medvedev’s	pseudo-liberal	palaver	infuriated	all
politically	 active	 people.	 In	 this	 situation,	 the
return	 of	 Putin	 failed	 to	 please	 even	 his
supporters.	 Russia	 1	 qualitatively	 lost	 its

legitimacy.	 The	 scene	 was	 finally	 set	 for	 a
confrontation	with	Russia	2.	In	March	2012,	Putin
returned	 for	 another	 12	 years	 and	 remained	 as
inarticulate	and	elusive	as	ever.	Historically,	the
Russia	1	strategy	was	a	flop.	It	still	exists	and	is
still	dominant,	but	its	days	are	numbered.
The	Orange	Russia
Russia	2,	‘the	orange	Russia’,	sprung	up	amidst
the	2004	events	in	Ukraine.	These	events	became
a	political	turning	point	for	Putin.	Putin	moved
towards	 patriotism	 and	 superpower	 geopolitics,
overstepping	the	mark	on	several	issues.	It	was
possibly	a	weak	and	uncertain	attempt	to	propose
a	serious	patriotic	agenda.	‘All	for	Russia!	All	in
the	name	of	Russia!’	This	could	have	been	just
the	thing...	But	the	blatantly	inadequate	methods,
the	poorly	trained	personnel	who	were	dispatched
to	 Kiev	 and	 total	 political	 inadequacy
demonstrated	at	once	that	this	course	did	not	have

any	substantive	base.
It	 later	 emerged	 that	 during	 Putin’s	 first
presidential	 term	 nothing	 had	 been	 done	 in	 the
area	 of	 genuine	 geopolitics	 in	 the	 post-Soviet
space,	 and	 the	 complex	 battle	 for	 Ukraine	 was
hastily	 delegated	 to	 a	 team	 of	 cynical
‘technicians’	close	to	the	Kremlin.	These	people
were	only	capable	of	siphoning	off	funds,	coming
up	 scams	 and	 cranking	 film	 cameras.	 The
liberally	 inclined	 Marat	 Gelman
[317]
	 and	 Gleb
Pavlovsky	played	important	roles.
That’s	how	Russia	2,	painted	in	orange,	first
appeared	 in	 the	 tents	 on	 Independence	 Square.
The	process	started	and	the	target	year	was	2008.
If	it	worked	in	Kiev,	the	next	time	it	would	work
in	 Moscow	 as	 well.	 Thus	 decided	 Washington,
Langley	and	(correspondingly)	the	Russian	liberal
opposition	itself.
What	is	Russia	2?	Nothing	new,	really:	it	is
Yeltsin’s	 Russia,	 well-known	 from	 the	 1990s,

after	plenty	of	sunbathing	on	Bermuda’s	beaches
and	 skiing	 in	 Courchevel.	 Don’t	 forget	 that,
unlike	 Ukraine,	 Russia	 had	 already	 had	 one
‘orange	 revolution’	 in	 1991,	 and	Yeltsin’s	 rule
was	painted	in	this	colour.	Even	the	facial	defects
of	Yeltsin	and	Yushchenko	are	vaguely	similar:
dead-pan,	 puffed-up,	 wicked	 and	 emotionless.
‘The	 orange	 Russia’	 consists	 of	 the	 same	 old
oligarchs,	who	are	exiled,	imprisoned,	and	scared
but	who	are	generally	maintaining	their	resilience
and	 high	 spirits;	 it	 is	 the	 urban	 cosmopolitan
intelligentsia,	 totally	 irresponsible	 and	 only
capable	 of	 destruction	 and	 ridicule;	 it	 is	 the
journalists	 with	 permanently	 split	 personalities
who	 are	 always	 outside	 observers	 of	 history
without	a	chance	of	participating	in	it;	it	is	human
rights	 activists,	 liberal	 reformers,	 as	 well	 as
greedy	conformist	officials	who	fulfil	any	orders
from	any	authorities	at	the	top.	In	short,	it	is	the
temporarily	frozen	and	slowly	melting,	unbridled

comprador	 elite	 and	 their	 writing-and-dancing
clique	of	servants,	which	disgustingly	calls	itself
‘the	creative	class’:	experts,	PR	specialists,	spin
doctors	 and	 the	 liberal	 bohemians	 exploited	 by
them.
The	elites	started	to	leave	Russia	1	for	Russia
2,	for	the	orange.	After	hiding	under	Putin’s	wing
during	a	specific	moment	of	political	history	and
managing	 to	 calm	 down	 the	 masses,	 they	 are
starting	a	new	attack	on	statehood.	The	masses,	in
turn,	 started	 to	 turn	 away	 from	 Russia	 1	 for	 a
different	 reason:	 they	 were	 no	 longer	 satisfied
with	 the	 phantom	 nature	 of	 Russia	 1,	 the
ephemeral	character	of	the	state,	nor	the	playful,
irresponsible	character	of	the	‘vertical’;	‘orange’
liberalism	is	alien	to	the	masses,	but	gradually
Russia	1	also	started	to	lose	their	trust.
In	2008,	Russia	2	was	faced	with	a	difficult
scenario.	Since	the	entire	operation	is	supervised
by	 Washington,	 the	 plan	 included	 the

simultaneous	 intensification	 of	 terrorism	 in	 the
Caucasus,	escalating	tension	in	the	CIS,	as	well	as
social	unrest	in	Russia	herself.	Putin	only	needed
to	mention	a	‘third	term’	and	Russia	2	would	be
placed	on	alert	for	a	full-scale	all-round	network
war.	Putin	pretended	that	he	voluntarily	opened
the	 Kremlin	 gates	 to	 Russia	 2,	 represented	 by
Medvedev,	  Dvorkovich,
[318]
	  Yurgens	  and
Gontmakher.	Note	that	the	reformer	Obama,	who
had	 just	 become	 President	 in	 November	 2008,
announced	a	‘reset’	in	relations	with	Russia.	Even
Brzezinski	supported	modernisation	and	believed
in	Medvedev.	With	Medvedev	Russia	would	not
have	 to	 be	 split,	 as	 Brzezinski	 had	 planned,
because	it	would	disintegrate	on	its	own	—	what
an	economy	of	effort!
Russia	2	in	its	radical	form	subsided	a	little,
waiting	for	Medvedev’s	second	term.
In	the	autumn	of	2011,	when	Putin	announced
his	 return	 as	 President,	 Russia	 2	 had	 no	 other

alternative	than	to	start	a	war	with	Russia	1.	The
Duma	elections,	badly	staged	by	the	authorities
with	 endless	 violations	 and	 rigged	 ballots,	 the
failure	 of	 Medvedev’s	 fruitless	 presidency	 and,
above	 all,	 a	 significant	 decline	 in	 Putin’s
credibility	among	the	general	public	set	the	scene
for	a	direct	confrontation.
What	 does	 Russia	 2	 want?	 Unlike	 Ukraine,
where	 the	 idea	 was	 to	 put	 a	 pro-Western
politician	 in	 place	 of	 the	 pro-Russian	 one,	 in
Russia	 herself	 this	 alternative	 is	 not	 viable.
Russia	is	a	country	populated	by	patriotic	masses.
Therefore,	the	pro-Western	elite	who	are	in	power
cannot	 openly	 state	 their	 priorities:	 the	 masses
would	 crush	 them	 for	 it.	 The	 overseas
masterminds	 of	 the	 entire	 process	 clearly
understand	that.	Liberalism	and	democracy	have
lost	 their	 credibility	 with	 the	 masses.	 ‘The
orange’	pursue	a	strictly	negative	aim:	destroying
Russia	1.	They	are	pushing	for	total	destruction.

Some	of	them	are	hoping	to	leave	this	country,
some	just	want	revenge,	some	want	to	cash	in	on
the	disintegration,	some	simply	fail	to	understand
the	situation	clearly	and	are	driven	by	emotion
rather	 than	 prudence,	 and	 some	 genuinely	 hate
‘this	 country’.	 Russia	 2	 is	 trying	 in	 vain	 to
dissipate	the	ghostly	Russia	1	to	finish	off	Russia
as	such.	Strange	as	it	may	seem,	in	a	sense,	it	can
serve	 as	 an	 inspiration	 to	 the	 masses:	 at	 some
historical	 points	 the	 Russians	 were	 prone	 to
nihilistic	 cults,	 love	 of	 death	 and	 a	 collective
suicide	impulse.	The	orange	colour	and	the	white
ribbons
[319]
	represent	a	playful	death	wish.
Russia	3	as	a	Project
One	 could	 draw	 a	 line	 here	 because,	 honestly,
Russia	1	and	Russia	2	are	an	exhaustive	picture	of
what	 we	 have	 today.	 A	 pale	 spectre	 versus	 a
happy	death.	But	the	voice	of	the	Russian	spirit
opposes	such	harsh	realism.	Every	nation	at	any

point	 of	 its	 national	 history	 has	 a	 right	 to	 a
spiritual	uprising,	to	an	awakening,	to	a	vertical,
persistent,	 unyielding	 stance.	 An	 uprising	 is
always	risky,	but	a	Russian	uprising	against	the
forces	of	doom	can	happen	as	long	as	there	are
Russian	people.
An	 uprising	 in	 favour	 of	 Russia	 3,	 of	 its
historical	 mission	 and	 its	 majestic	 destiny,	 of
Russia	 as	 an	 Empire,	 of	 the	 great	 order,
corresponding	to	the	vast	expanses	of	our	lands,
the	 height	 of	 our	 mountains,	 the	 depths	 of	 our
rivers,	has	not	yet	been	sold	or	taken	away.	Every
Russian	feels	it	in	his	heart,	in	spite	of	the	fact
that	we	allowed	ourselves	to	become	idiots	and
sank	to	an	all-time	low.
This	 is	 our	 eternal	 motherland,	 the	 absolute
motherland,	the	Holy	of	Holies.	This	true	Russia
was	bequeathed	to	us	centuries	ago.	It	is	hidden
from	view	but	open	to	our	spirit.	We	can	hear	her
cry,	we	can	sense	her	smoke,	we	can	see	her	rays

with	our	eyes	closed.
We	raise	the	banner	of	the	universal	gathering.
We	 are	 signalling.	 Join	 Russia	 3	 when,	 like
Marmeladov
[320]
	said,	‘There	is	nowhere	 else	 to
go!’		
The	Tactics	for	Today	and	Tomorrow
For	 the	 entire	 period	 since	 2004,	 Russia	 3
remained	a	project,	a	dream,	a	horizon.	What	we
see	 today:	 Russia	 1,	 United	 Russia,	 headed	 by
Medvedev,	who	betrayed	Libya,	and,	accordingly,
by	Yurgens	and	Gontmakher,	with	nasty	elections
and	with	an	invitation	to	rejoice	in	the	shameful
state	of	this	confused	country	which	has	lost	its
raison	 d’etre;	 without	 hope	 and	 without	 a
strategy,	 without	 an	 Idea	 and	 purpose	 but
constantly	provided	with	entertainment	and	new
gadgets;	with	Putin	who	basically	ignored	those
who	believed	in	him.	And	Russia	2,	headed	by
radical	pro-American	stool	pigeons,	Russophobes,

oligarchs	 who	 were	 removed	 from	 their	 plum
positions	 and	 are	 now	 out	 for	 revenge,	 and
psychotic	 liberals	 who	 view	 even	 this	 helpless
and	 confused	 Russia	 of	 Putin’s	 as	 a	 ‘prison	 of
nations’	and	as	a	‘cruel	dictatorship’.	Defending
Russia	1	is	not	only	repulsive,	it	is	impossible.
But	one	can’t	go	to	Russia	2	with	a	white	funeral
ribbon	 or	 to	 the	 ultra-nationalist	 stool	 pigeons
who	 are	 rubbing	 their	 hands	 together	 in
anticipation	 of	 another	 cycle	 of	 Russia’s
disintegration	and	relishing	the	idea	of	cashing	in
on	it.	We	have	finally	come	to	the	point	where
without	the	creation	of	Russia	3,	a	third	force,	a
third	 political	 and	 ideological	 platform,	 one
simply	cannot	go	on	living.
A	Chain	Reaction	of	the
Authorities’	Legitimacy
Russia	was,	is	and	always	will	be	a	major	player
in	international	politics	—	‘major’	in	terms	of	the

laws	that	govern	the	geopolitical	model	of	world
domination.	The	creation	of	a	unipolar	world	is
only	 possible	 through	 the	 dismantling	 of	 the
Eurasian	 system.	 Who	 rules	 Eurasia	 is	 not
important:	whether	it	is	the	Mongol	Empire,	the
Russian	 Empire,	 the	 USSR	 or	 the	 Union	 State.
‘Russia	 is	 the	 Heartland.	 He	 who	 controls	 the
Heartland,	 controls	 the	 world,’	 Sir	 Halford
Mackinder	wrote.
[321]
	It	is	extremely	important	for
the	West	to	break	up	Russia	and	turn	it	into	a
fragmented	zone,	an	intention	expressly	stated	by
Brzezinski.	The	battle	for	Russia	is	in	full	force.
Everything	 now	 depends	 on	 the	 direction
Russia	 will	 choose	 to	 move	 in.	 If	 globally	 she
conducts	 a	 policy	 independent	 of	 the	 US,	 then
together	 with	 other	 powerful	 countries	 and
regions	(China,	India,	Brazil	and,	possibly,	even	a
united	Europe)	she	may	become	the	engine	of	a
multipolar	world,	which	will	mean	the	end	of	the
unipolar	 world	 and	 the	 end	 of	 American

hegemony.	 If	 Russia	 has	 to	 drop	 out	 of	 this
configuration,	then	the	multipolar	world	will	not
be	 realised.	 The	 Americans	 have	 the	 means,
resources	 and	 methods	 to	 restrain	 the	 other
regions	 claiming	 to	 be	 poles	 of	 the	 multipolar
world.	Only	Russia	is	capable	of	connecting	them
and	of	integrating	them	into	a	whole.
The	 ultra-liberals	 grouping	 together	 in	 the
‘orange’	Russia	2	are	the	exponents	of	the	pro-
American,	  treacherous	  course,	  aimed	  at
surrendering	 our	 positions	 and	 helping	 the
Americans	maintain	the	unipolar	world.
Back	in	the	day,	Putin’s	Munich	speech	was
seen	as	Russia’s	return	to	her	historical	mission.
We	are	not	witnessing	Russia	falling	back	from
these	positions.	
Putin	 is	 credited	 with	 stopping	 the
disintegration	 of	 Russia	 through	 his	 policy.
Unfortunately,	 this	 problem	 is	 not	 yet	 solved.
Yes,	the	issue	with	Chechnya	has	been	settled,	but

what	is	happening	in	Dagestan	and	other	North
Caucasus	 regions	 clearly	 indicates	 that	 the
problem	of	separatism	is	ongoing	and	is	on	fertile
ground.	We	can	now	see	the	downside	of	Putin’s
course	and	the	possibility	of	backtracking.	Putin
started	 to	 do	 everything	 right	 but	 stopped
halfway,	without	reaching	the	point	of	no	return.
Take	the	conflict	with	Belarus,	for	example.
Putin	had	adverse	relations	with	Lukashenko,	but
he	interpreted	his	differences	with	the	Belarussian
leader,	first,	not	as	a	conflict	of	personalities,	and
second,	not	as	a	conflict	of	political	personalities,
but	 as	 a	 conflict	 over	 purely	 technical	 issues.
Overall,	Putin	always	adhered	to	the	main	idea	of
a	 strategic	 partnership	 between	 Russia	 and
Belarus	and	was	loyal	to	the	idea	of	the	Union
State.	 Russian	 liberals	 and	 pro-American
influence	 groups	 in	 the	 Kremlin	 tried	 to
‘separate’	Russia	and	Belarus	even	with	Putin	in
power.	 But	 Moscow’s	 policy	 towards	 Minsk

ultimately	 hit	 the	 wrong	 track	 with	 Medvedev,
who	 made	 ill-fated	 remarks	 addressed	 at
Lukashenko.	 We	 are	 the	 older	 brothers	 of	 our
Belarusian	neighbour	and	we	should	forgive	our
younger	brother	whose	actions	we	don’t	like.		
Medvedev	generally	showed	himself	to	 be	 a
man	inexperienced	in	foreign	policy,	and	he	is	not
a	quick	learner,	either.	His	video	addresses	and
the	 innocent	 joy	 he	 displays	 at	 the	 cheap
technological	 gadgets	 presented	 to	 him	 by	 the
Americans,	  who	  quickly	  identified	  his
weaknesses,	 deserve	 a	 special	 mention	 here.
Sometimes	his	steps	in	international	politics	were
implemented	so	clumsily	that	they	were	met	with
laughter	 and	 contempt.	 When	 Bush	 did	 similar
things,	it	was	not	disgraceful	for	America	because
Bush	 was	 backed	 by	 a	 massive	 intellectual
apparatus.	Medvedev,	however,	was	not	‘backed’
by	 anyone	 except	 the	 enemies	 of	 Russia.
Medvedev’s	actions	were	the	realisation	of	ultra-

liberal	 and	 anti-national	 strategies.	 When	 Putin
returned	 to	 power,	 he	 had	 to	 tackle	 the	 huge,
newly-formed	 clump	 of	 unsolved	 and	 partially
unsolvable	problems,	which	had	multiplied	since
he	left	to	perform	supporting	roles	in	2005.
A	People’s	Front	without	the	People
Early	 in	 May	 2011,	 Prime	 Minister	 Vladimir
Putin	 declared	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 All-Russian
People’s	Front,	a	coalition	of	public	organisations
which	allowed	non-party	candidates	to	be	eligible
for	the	2011	Duma	elections	in	accordance	with
the	 list	 of	 United	 Russia.	 But	 the	 very	 first
meeting	 of	 the	 Coordination	 Council	 of	 the
People’s	Front	was	held	with	the	participation	of
Alexander	Shokhin.
[322]
	Excuse	me	for	saying	so,
but	Shokhin	is	the	epitome	of	an	someone	who	is
against	the	people.	This	means	that	the	People’s
Front	issue	can	be	adjourned.	It	has	no	more	sense
than	anything	else	that	our	authorities	are	doing.

The	 Front	 will	 simply	 perform	 insignificant
political	and	technical	functions.
Still,	 the	 People’s	 Front,	 the	 idea	 for	 which
was	proposed	by	me,	must	make	one	think:	what
is	 a	 people?	 When	 I	 say	 that	 Shokhin	 is	 the
antithesis	 of	 the	 people,	 it	 opens	 up	 many
meanings	of	the	notion	of	‘people’	because	any
notion	is	defined	through	its	polar	opposite.
One	can	single	out	several	layers	in	the	notion
of	 a	 ‘people’.	 We,	 the	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	are	a	people	inasmuch	as	we	are	not
the	 citizens	 of	 Ukraine,	 France,	 Europe,	 or
Turkey.	The	border	between	us	and	them	is	based
on	our	citizenship,	statehood,	society,	language,
and	 culture.	 Thus,	 a	 people	 is	 contrasted	 with
another	people.
A	 people	 is	 also	 contrasted	 with	 an	 elite.	A
people	is	the	majority,	an	elite	is	the	minority.
There	are	no	societies	where	the	majority	lives	in
better	conditions	than	the	ruling	minority.	When

we	say	‘a	people’	we	mean	the	simple,	miserable
people	who	make	up	the	lower	and	middle	classes
of	social	stratification.
A	people	is	also	an	ethnos	in	some	sense.	A
people	 is	 a	 composite	 element	 consisting	 of
ethnic	elements.	It	is	somewhat	different	from	an
ethnos.	 There	 are	 ethnoses:	 the	 Chechens,	 the
Avar,
[323]
	the	Great	Russians,	the	Kalmyks,
[324]
	and
there	 is	 a	 Russian	 folk,	 or	 people,	 which
integrates	these	ethnoses.	At	the	ethnic	level	we
stress	differences	and	at	the	level	of	the	people
we	 stress	 unification.	 A	 people	 is	 an	 integral
element	which	opposes	disintegration.
A	people	is	different	from	a	‘population’.	A
people	is	a	historical	phenomenon,	a	people	has	a
history.	A	population	simply	occupies	a	certain
territory	at	a	certain	point	in	time.	A	people	is	a
historically	 continuous	 succession,	 a	 process	 of
existence	 that	 links	 generations.	 A	 people	 is
always	 bigger	 than	 a	 population.	 A	 people

worship	their	dead	ancestors;	a	population	lacks
them	 (their	 dead	 souls	 are	 not	 classified
anywhere).	 A	 people	 has	 descendants	 who	 are
methodically	 conceived	 at	 night	 in	 order	 to
multiply	and	populate	future	centuries	and	cycles
to	come.	If	history	did	not	have	this	work	done	by
the	 people,	 we	 would	 not	 have	 a	 historical
memory	and	would	not	care	about	the	future.	A
people	 is	 a	 historical	 notion,	 contrasted	 with	 a
population	as	a	purely	statistical	phenomenon.
A	 people	 is	 a	 specific	 notion	 and
simultaneously	 a	 historical,	 social,	 geopolitical,
cultural,	 and	 sociological	 reality	 possessing	 a
philosophical	 structure	 and	 all	 the	 attributes	 of
existence.	 The	 People’s	 Front	 should	 have
responded	to	these	deeply-rooted	characteristics
of	the	people.	It	should	have	been	a	front	of	the
majority	 against	 the	 elite	 minority,	 a	 front
requiring	 that	 the	 interests	 of	 the	 majority,
miserable	and	inferior,	be	respected	by	the	elite.

The	 People’s	 Front	 should	 have	 been	 an
ultimatum	to	the	authorities	and	the	elite:	‘Follow
the	people	and	you	will	become	an	elite,	but	if
you	 go	 to	 Courchevel	 and	 acquire	 a	 face	 like
Mikhail	Prokhorov’s,
[325]
	you	will	be	sent	to	the
stables.	This	facial	expression	is	insulting	and	is
against	the	people.’	Shokhin	has	exactly	that	kind
of	 expression.	 The	 People’s	 Front	 could	 be
relevant	if	it	followed	the	Russian	trajectories	of
the	national	ethos;	defended	Russia	before	other
countries;	 strived	 for	 the	 unification	 of	 the
ethnoses	in	the	face	of	separatism;	stood	for	the
nationalism	 of	 the	 miserable,	 simple	 people
against	  the	  self-indulgent,	  anti-Russian
Russophobic	elite;	and	stood	for	history	against
the	 bluff	 of	 a	 consumer	 society.	 It	 would	 be	 a
wonderful	metaphysical,	philosophical,	political,
ideological,	 and	 global	 program.	 Regretfully,
Putin’s	People’s	Front	does	not	have	anything	in
common	with	such	an	understanding	of	‘people’.	

			
Putin	 would	 be	 better	 off	 engaging	 in	 a
genuine	 people’s	 front	 and	 not	 in	 the	 People’s
Front	that	he	is	dealing	with	at	the	moment.	The
meaning	 of	 notions	 is	 the	 principal	 aspect	 of
politics;	 semantics	 is	 what	 propels	 political
processes.	If	we	start	with	kōans:	invite	the	self-
indulgent	bourgeois	to	a	poor	people’s	gathering,
grant	 maternity	 leave	 to	 bachelors,	 or	 invite	 a
thousand	 ‘crowned	 thieves’	 and	 those	 who	 are
notoriously	corrupt	to	a	people’s	front	and	claim
that	they	are	the	best	people,	the	entire	point	is
lost.
Putin’s	Dead	End
An	Analysis	of	the	Political	Situation	after
4	March	2012	
In	 order	 to	 understand	 what	 is	 going	 on	 in
contemporary	 Russian	 politics	 and	 what	 to

expect,	it	is	necessary	to	retrace	the	events	that
preceded	our	present	situation.	We	will	start	in
2008.
Putin’s	two	terms	were	over	and	he	faced	a
dilemma:	 how	 to	 preserve	 power	 without
violating	the	provisions	of	the	Constitution.	He
could	 have	 had	 a	 third	 term	 in	 spite	 of	 the
Constitution.	He	had	credibility,	and	a	people’s
referendum	 would	 have	 supported	 this	 idea
without	hesitation.	But	what	about	a	fourth	term?
Another	referendum?	Some	people	urged	Putin	to
do	it,	but	he	refused.
Another	 possible	 scenario:	 he	 could	 have
chosen	a	successor	from	those	who	could	stick	to
his	 course,	 like	 Sergei	 Ivanov	 or	 Vladimir
Yakunin.
[326]
	These	superpower	nationalists	from
the	law	enforcement	agencies	would	soon	be	no
less	popular	than	Putin	himself,	but	in	four	years
they	would	probably	not	give	the	power	back,	so
Putin	brushed	this	option	aside	as	well.

He	 could	 have	 chosen	 the	 pensioner	 Viktor
Zubkov,
[327]
	but	that	would	have	looked	grotesque
and	Viktor	Alexeevich	would	have	sunk	his	teeth
deep	into	the	power	structure	(there	are	always
people	who	can	prompt	him	to	do	it	and	who	will
support	him	in	the	process).	So	this	was	not	an
option	either.
The	Manoeuvre
There	 was	 only	 one	 option	 left:	 to	 bet	 on	 an
unpopular	figure	not	capable	of	holding	on	to	the
position	 after	 March	 2012,	 but	 capable	 of
appeasing	and	alluring	the	West,	as	well	as	the
domestic	 liberal	 opposition.	 In	 other	 words,
someone	 who	 could	 delay	 the	 imminent
confrontation	 with	 Washington.	 This	 is	 what
Putin	opted	to	do,	and	this	reshuffling	was	dubbed
‘a	tandem’.
And	it	worked!	The	West	and	the	opposition
seriously	 believed	 in	 Medvedev’s	 second	 term

and	 postponed	 their	 plan	 for	 Russia’s
disintegration.	 Expecting	 a	 rerun	 of	 Gorbachev,
and	believing	that	he	would	be	able	to	personally
continue	 with	 the	 disintegration	 of	 the	 country
after	2012,	they	slowed	down	a	little.	Medvedev’s
entourage	 (I.	 Yurgens,	 E.	 Gontmakher,	 etc.)
convincingly	 reported	 to	 the	 American	 and
British	secret	intelligence	services:	‘Wait	a	little
and	 we	 will	 do	 everything	 ourselves.’	 They
waited	until	September	2011.	In	September,	after
the	 congress	 of	 United	 Russia,	 there	 was	 a
showdown.	Putin	returned	—	more	precisely,	he
showed	us	that,	in	fact,	he	had	never	left	in	the
first	 place.	 The	 hopes	 for	 an	 ‘evolutionary’
disintegration	  of	  Russia	  were	  thwarted.
Washington	 activated	 Plan	 B,	 that	 is,	 the	 more
radical	 plan:	 their	 agents	 of	 influence	 received
envelopes	with	the	word	‘revolution’	inscribed	on
them.	This	is	what	upset	the	opposition	so	much:
the	feeling	that	they	were	duped	by	the	Medvedev

scheme.	 They	 started	 to	 hastily	 prepare	 for	 the
‘Bolotnaya’
[328]
	 and	 ‘Snezhnaya’	 revolutions,
fastening	white	ribbons	to	their	lapels.
Putin’s	 own	 entourage	 played	 up	 to	 the
liberals.	While	in	power,	Putin’s	corrupt	officials
did	 everything	 to	 increase	 the	 inefficiency	 and
unpopularity	 of	 the	 authorities,	 but,	 after	 being
fired,	 they	 pointed	 at	 the	 social	 and	 economic
failures	they	had	themselves	created	and	shifted
the	 blame	 to	 Putin.	 Good	 examples	 of	 this	 are
Kudrin	 or	 Surkov,	 who	 called	 the	 people	 who
gathered	 on	 Bolotnaya,	 ‘the	 best	 people	 Russia
has	to	offer’.	Creating,	almost	singlehandedly,	the
utterly	 pointless	 entity	 of	 United	 Russia	 and
making	sure	that	not	a	single	political	idea	sprung
up	from	its	ranks	(thus	delegitimising	it),	Surkov
delegated	 responsibility	 and	 scurried	 to	 the
government	and	then	delegated	it	even	lower,	as
usual,	when	the	time	came	to	pay	the	bills.
Thus,	on	4	March	2012,	Putin	stood	face	to

face	with	America	and	its	network	of	agents,	from
then	 onward	 geared	 towards	 a	 revolution.	 This
network	 has	 two	 segments:	 street	 level
(Bolotnaya)	 and	 intra-governmental.	 They	 are
directly	 related:	Yurgens,	 Timakova
[329]
	 and	 the
like	stand	with	one	foot	in	the	Kremlin	and	with
the	 other	 foot	 in	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 anti-Putin
revolutionary	crowd.
Besides,	a	gigantic	layer	of	the	corrupt	Russian
elite	 also	 plays	 into	 the	 anti-Putin	 revolution.
Habitually	selling	and	betraying	everything,	they
don’t	 mind	 selling	 their	 country	 out	 too,	 given
half	a	chance.
Today,	 Putin	 finds	 himself	 in	 a	 difficult
situation.	He	is	back	without	having	violated	the
law	and	there	are	no	competitors	left.	The	West
fell	for	‘Perestroika	2’	and	the	‘reset’.	Mission
accomplished.	But	at	what	price...
Why	is	the	West	against	Putin?
Almost	immediately	after	his	first	election,	the

West	classified	Putin	as	‘the	bad	guy’.	He	failed
to	become	a	‘friend’	of	the	West.	They	sensed	his
persistency	when	it	came	to	defending	Russia’s
national	interests.	Putin	embarked	on	a	path	of
strengthening	Russia	and	her	sovereignty,	daring
to	conduct,	albeit	partially	and	fragmentarily,	an
independent	regional	policy	—	a	course	that	stood
in	sharp	contrast	with	the	policies	of	Gorbachev
and	Yeltsin.	Initially	softly	and	cautiously,	then
overtly,	he	challenged	American	hegemony	and
unipolar	globalisation.	In	his	Munich	speech	he
called	 a	 spade	 a	 spade.	 After	 that,	 the	 West
became	disillusioned	with	the	Russian	president.
‘This	is	a	bad	guy,’	Washington	resolved.	‘Time
to	finish	him	off.’
Putin	could	be	dealt	with	and	on	some	issues
he	could	even	strike	a	compromise	with	the	West
(such	 as	 in	 his	 cooperation	 with	 the	 US	 on
Afghanistan,	 relations	 with	 NATO,	 etc.).	 On
economic	 issues	 he	 was	 liberal-minded	 and

constantly	avoided	social	policy,	which	made	his
domestic	popularity	genuinely	justified.	This	was
sufficient	 for	 the	 West.	 Putin	 did	 not	 exactly
oppose	global	hegemony,	but	he	did	manage	to
slow	it	down.	He	disrupted	the	schedule	of	global
‘democratisation’	and	‘de-sovereignisation’.	That
is	 why	 he	 was	 demonised	 and	 sentenced	 to
deposition.	 Operation	 ‘tandem’	 delayed	 the
West’s	most	radical	scenario	for	four	years,	but
did	 not	 remove	 it	 from	 the	 agenda.	 Today	 the
process	is	underway.
Hegemony
We	are	talking	about	hegemony	—	a	term	that
some	might	consider	anachronistic.	But	Antonio
Gramsci
[330]
	 gave	 a	 precise	 definition	 to
‘hegemony’	 as	 ‘a	 rule	 that	 is	 not	 perceived	 as
such	by	those	in	power’.	The	difference	between
hegemony	and	direct	power	is	that	the	existence
of	hegemony	is	not	declared,	not	emphasised,	and

not	 fixed	 in	 documents,	 laws	 or	 agreements.
Hegemony	 exists	 as	 a	 fact,	 and	 everybody	 is
content	 with	 it,	 but	 it	 is	 rather	 implied	 than
expressly	declared.
Today	we	live	in	the	conditions	of	expanding
hegemony.	It	has	two	forms.	The	first	is	direct,
express	American	hegemony	(called	‘unipolarity’
or	 ‘the	 American	 empire’),	 which	 is	 openly
admitted	 by	American	 neoconservatives.	 It	 was
almost	an	official	policy	during	the	presidency	of
George	 W.	 Bush.	 The	 second	 is	 the	 disguised
hegemony	of	globalism	implemented	through	the
global	distribution	of	Western	values,	norms	and
procedures	 as	 a	 universal	 socio-political	 and
economic	 organisation	 (the	 latter	 is	 sometimes
called	 a	 ‘pole-free	 world’,	 in	 which	 the	 West
dominates	not	in	the	name	of	a	certain	country
but	 as	 an	 invisible	 centre,	 setting	 the	 global
protocol	and	its	system	of	codes	and	rules).
Both	types	of	hegemony,	in	spite	of	the	fact

that	their	theoreticians	are	sometimes	in	discord,
concur	in	that	there	should	not	be	an	independent
and	sovereign	power	that	could	act	independently
of	the	US	and	establish	systems	of	norms,	rules,
interests	and	values	significantly	different	from
those	of	the	liberal	democratic,	market-capitalist
Western	 code.	 In	 the	 entire	 world,	 both	 in	 the
West	 and	 in	 other	 regions	 of	 the	 planet,
hegemony	 exists	 in	 the	 form	 of	 various
institutions,	networks	and	groups	of	influence	at
various	 levels:	 from	 government	 entities	 to
financial	centres,	transnational	corporations,	non-
government	 organisations,	 centres	 supporting
‘democracy	and	human	rights’,	the	international
media	and	various	Internet	communities.	Where
the	 government’s	 official	 course	 complies	 with
hegemony,	 these	 networks	 function	 publicly.
When	countries	try	to	avoid	hegemony,	to	defend
their	(even	relative)	independence,	the	agents	of
hegemony	form	the	‘fifth	column’,	acting	in	the

name	 of	 ‘democracy’,	 ‘human	 rights’,	 ‘civil
society’,	and	so	forth.
Putin	stood	in	the	way	of	the	expansion	and
strengthening	 of	 Western	 hegemony	 within	 the
territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 state.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he
engaged	 in	 a	 conflict	 with	 it.	 This	 is	 a	 key	 to
understanding	the	political	processes	unfolding	in
contemporary	 Russia.	 Today	 the	 leaders	 of
Bolotnaya	act	as	operational	centres	of	this	same
network	of	influence.
4	March
The	 elections	 of	 4	 March	 2012	 were	 utterly
transparent,	but	their	results	still	were,	and	had	to
be,	 contested	 by	 the	 radical	 opposition.	 In	 the
virtual	 picture	 of	 the	 world	 created	 by	 the
architects	of	hegemony,	elections	of	‘bad	guys’
are	 automatically	 declared	 invalid	 because,	 in
terms	 of	 hegemony,	 Putin	 is	 permanently
‘illegitimate’.	‘A	good	Putin	is	an	absent	Putin.’

This	 is	 the	 axiom	 of	 global	 politics.	 In	 such	 a
situation,	what	does	the	opinion	of	Russian	voters
amount	 to?	 Practically	 nothing.	 Hegemony
habitually	ignores	the	opinion	of	the	majority	in
the	 cases	 where	 such	 opinion	 goes	 against	 its
interests.	 For	 example,	 in	 the	 1990s	 the	 liberal
pro-Western	 team	 of	 Yeltsin	 and	 the	 young
reformers	 unblinkingly	 ignored	 the	 referendum
on	the	preservation	of	the	USSR,	and	in	1993	it
attacked	the	Parliament	in	cold	blood.	The	West
sympathetically	 accepted	 and	 approved	 that.
Violence	 on	 the	 part	 of	 the	 supporters	 of
hegemony	is	not	violence,	it	is	the	‘side	effects’
of	 democracy.	 That	 is	 why	 the	 transparent	 and
convincing	victory	of	Putin	in	the	first	round	did
not	impress	the	West	at	all.
Another	 question	 arises:	 how	 will	 Putin
orchestrate	his	relations	with	the	Russian	masses?
If	he	realises	that	the	hegemony	games	are	over
and	not	one	of	his	promises	or	statements	in	the

liberal	 or	 pro-Western	 vein	 will	 be	 trusted	 by
either	Washington	or	the	radical	opposition,	his
last	resort	will	be	the	Russian	people	and	their
backing.	 This	 will	 strengthen	 his	 position
domestically,	 but	 none	 of	 his	 concessions	 will
enhance	his	position	in	the	outside	world.			
If	 Putin	 continues	 to	 manoeuver,	 he	 risks
losing	the	domestic	support	of	the	masses	as	well.
The	 opposition,	 working	 for	 hegemony,	 will
cynically	 chalk	 it	 up	 and	 it	 will	 become	 their
trump	 card,	 because	 there	 are	 not	 enough
supporters	of	pure	liberalism	and	Westernism	to
effect	another	revolution.
The	Principal	Trajectories	of	the	Political
Cycle	Today
The	plot	of	the	first	scenario	is	Putin	preserving
the	 old	 power	 model,	 based	 on	 a	 compromise
between	Western	hegemony	and	support	from	the
masses	of	the	people.	Putin’s	famous	formula	is	a

combination	 of	 ‘liberalism’	 and	 ‘patriotism’.
Liberalism	 is	 intended	 for	 the	 West	 and	 the
Russian	 economic	 and,	 to	 an	 extent,	 political
elites,	 and	 patriotism	 is	 for	 the	 masses.	 Since
these	notions	are	mutually	exclusive	or,	at	least,
mutually	restraining,	there	has	been	no	real	shift
towards	either	of	these	trends.	Nevertheless,	this
model	was	successful	in	the	early	2000s,	although
it	 started	 to	 malfunction	 in	 2004-2005	 and
practically	ran	dry	after	2008,	when	the	successor,
tandem	and	‘reset’	issues	came	to	the	fore.	It	was
a	marked	liberal	shift,	which	logically	led	to	the
elimination	of	Putin	along	with	the	second	half	of
his	 formula,	 patriotism.	 If	 Putin’s	 declarations
after	the	election	continue	to	be	ambiguous	and
elusive,	 stemming	 from	 this	 formula,	 where
incompatible	directives	and	trends	sometimes	pop
up,	  like	  globalisation	  and	  sovereignty,
democratisation	 and	 the	 strengthening	 of	 the
vertical	 power,	 a	 path	 toward	 closer	 ties	 with

Europe	  and	  focus	  on	  the	  independent
development	of	Russia,	next	time	this	may	arouse
distrust,	 alienation	 and	 rejection	 among	 both
basic	sectors	of	society:	the	elite	and	the	masses.
It	 is	 obvious	 that	 any	 attempts	 by	 Putin	 to
attract	 the	 supporters	 of	 hegemony,	 liberals,
Westernists	 and	 ‘democrats’	 will	 not	 be	 taken
seriously	by	them.	He	will	not	be	forgiven	for	the
ruse	 with	 Medvedev	 and	 the	 associated	 failed
hopes	 for	 the	 evolutionary	 disintegration	 of
Russia.
At	the	same	time,	the	masses,	not	seeing	any
serious	steps	by	Putin	towards	a	social	policy	and
a	national	idea,	will	finally	become	disillusioned
too.
In	view	of	Washington’s	unanimous	decision
to	remove	Putin,	the	‘inertial’	scenario	will	equal
a	 gradual	 political	 suicide.	 The	 ‘liberalism	 +
patriotism’	 formula	 no	 longer	 works.	 But	 does
Putin	himself	understand	that?

If	one	foregoes	emotions	and	wishful	thinking,
one	 has	 to	 admit	 that,	 unfortunately,	 it	 is	 this
‘inertial’	 scenario	 that	 appears	 to	 be	 the	 most
likely	one.	In	this	case	we	should	expect	serious
perturbations,	maybe	even	revolutions	and	wars.
The	 second	 scenario	 is	 capitulation,	 which
means	that	Putin,	realising	the	seriousness	of	his
situation,	 decides	 to	 capitulate	 before	 the
onslaught	of	hegemony	and,	rejecting	patriotism,
will	 move	 towards	 the	 West	 and	 clear-cut
liberalism.	The	possibility	of	taking	this	course,
however,	 is	 in	 contradiction	 with	 Putin’s
psychological	portrait.	Theoretically,	in	this	case
Putin	will	have	to	make	certain	concessions	to	the
West	and	start	the	process	of	‘democratisation’,
‘liberalisation’	 and	 the	 simultaneous	 de-
sovereignisation	of	Russia.	The	moves	to	weaken
the	 vertical	 power,	 to	 bring	 about	 the
liberalisation	of	the	electoral	legislation	and	the
revocation	 of	 the	 selection	 by	 Presidential

appointment	of	the	governors	of	the	subjects	of
the	Federation	(the	territorial	subdivisions)	can	be
interpreted	as	moves	in	this	direction.
In	this	case	the	most	problematic	aspect	is	the
following:	 sooner	 or	 later	 (rather	 sooner	 than
later)	liberals	and	their	Western	supervisors	will
propose	 that	 Putin	 delegate	 power	 to	 another
political	figure.	This	figure	can	be	an	opposition
representative	 or	 a	 compromise	 variant	 like
Dmitry	 Medvedev.	 According	 to	 the	 logic	 of
global	 hegemony,	 Putin’s	 offences	 are	 so
grievous	 that	 he	 will	 have	 to	 pay	 a	 very	 high
price.	Putin	surely	understands	this.
That	said,	Putin	has	already	missed	his	chance
to	 delegate	 his	 power	 to	 Medvedev	 peacefully.
His	decision	to	return	to	the	Kremlin	significantly
reduced	 his	 chances,	 however	 small,	 to	 be
forgiven	by	global	hegemony.	Choosing	in	favour
of	liberalism	and	the	West	will	automatically	cost
Putin	 his	 power	 and	 subsequently	 cause	 fairly

serious	repercussions.	This	scenario	appears	to	be
unlikely.
The	third	scenario	is	the	transfiguration	of	the
empire.
The	 last	 possible	 scenario	 for	 Putin	 after	 4
March	 is	 for	 him	 to,	 out	 of	 his	 own	 formula,
select	‘patriotism’	as	a	priority.	It	will	mean	that
he	has	finally	and	irreversibly	resolved	to	bet	on
the	 masses,	 which	 are	 expecting	 order,	 justice,
imperial	power	and	a	revival	of	the	country	from
him.	 To	 achieve	 this	 one	 has	 to	 replace	 the
slogans	of	‘stability’	and	‘comfort’	with	those	of
mobilisation,	 exerting	 effort	 and	 spiritual
uplifting.	Patriotism	in	this	case	will	mean	not
only	 the	 preservation	 of	 the	 existing	 state	 of
things	but	a	leap	upward.	Not	just	conservatism
but	a	conservative	revolution.
This	 is	 an	 extremely	 difficult	 path.	 This
scenario	contradicts	various	tendencies	and	trends
which	started	to	take	root	in	Russia	in	the	1990s.

The	main	staples	of	this	policy	are	the	following
(as	I	see	them):
The	 formulation	 of	 a	 consistent	 and	 three-
dimensional	 model	 for	 the	 strategic	 revival	 of
Great	Russia	as	an	independent	empire,	capable
of	confronting	hegemony	in	all	its	forms	(both
overt	and	implied).	To	do	this	it	is	necessary	to
rely	on	one’s	own	resources	and	traditional	values
and	look	for	supporters	among	the	world	powers
that	also	refuse	to	recognise	hegemony	and	which
are	interested	in	a	multipolar,	polycentric	world
order.
A	 radical	 rotation	 of	 the	 elites	 involving	 a
mass	 replacement	 of	 the	 bureaucracy	 and
financial	oligarchy	that	was	formed	in	the	Yeltsin
era,	 with	 new	 patriotic,	 ideologically	 motivated
cadres	(the	new	nobility).
A	division	of	all	spheres	of	corruption	into	two
parts:	 corruption	 involving	 the	 betrayal	 of
Russian	 national	 interests	 and	 corruption	 not

involving	 such	 betrayal.	 Drastic,	 fast-paced
elimination	 of	 the	 first	 part	 and	 gradual
preparation	for	a	struggle	with	the	second.	Today
corruption	is	not	just	Russia’s	domestic	problem,
it	 is	 a	 transnational	 phenomenon	 with	 overseas
connections.	 Only	 when	 corruption	 is	 confined
within	Russia	can	it	be	defeated.
A	 revival	 of	 spiritual	 and	 aesthetic	 culture,
education	 and	 tradition.	 Russian	 society	 is
overcome	with	moral	degradation,	cynicism	and
degeneration.	 The	 disintegration	 of	 the	 Soviet
codes	 has	 been	 combined	 with	 the	 uncritical
adoption	 of	 elements	 of	 Western	 postmodern
culture,	which,	in	its	turn,	is	deteriorating.	This
process	must	be	decisively	reversed.	Culture	has
crucial	importance	for	the	existence	of	a	society.
A	cultural	revolution	is	necessary.
In	 economics	 a	 radical	 turn	 away	 from	 the
ultra-liberal	 model	 is	 needed,	 aimed	 at	 the
financial	sector	and	natural	resources	trade,	to	the

development	 of	 high	 technology,	 social	 policy
and	industry.	From	the	virtual	economy,	which	is
increasing	Russia’s	dependence	on	the	flow	of	the
global	 financial	 networks	 with	 their	 habitual
crises	and	catastrophes,	it	is	necessary	to	shift	to
real	economy.										
In	order	to	realise	this	scenario	Putin	will	have
to	make	a	serious	effort.	With	the	help	of	a	course
that	 focuses	 on	 meaningful,	 consistent	 and
logically	 sound	 patriotism	 he	 will	 have	 a	 good
chance	to	strengthen	his	position	as	the	genuine
leader	 of	 Russia	 and	 start	 the	 revival	 of	 the
country	in	earnest.	But	to	do	this	he	will	have	to
use	 extremely	 tough	 domestic	 measures,
especially	as	regards	the	power	elite,	and	he	will
have	 to	 confront	 significant	 pressure	 from	 the
West	and	global	hegemony.
The	fact	that	Putin	had	not	previously	made
any	significant	steps	to	prepare	for	such	a	turn	in
his	 policy	 impairs	 the	 prospects	 for	 the	 third

scenario.	Theoretically,	however,	this	way	exists
and	it	is	the	only	way	that	can	help	us	to	avoid
revolutions	and	catastrophes.
A	 brief	 analysis	 of	 these	 three	 scenarios
reveals	 an	 interesting	 perspective.	 Russia	 is
definitely	entering	a	zone	of	political	turbulence.
The	country	is	starting	to	shake.	The	agents	of
influence	 for	 global	 hegemony	 and	 its	 network
will	 take	 care	 of	 that,	 and	 the	 authorities	 will
mechanically	create	suitable	conditions	for	them
(against	their	own	will).
Previously	we	have	analysed	the	situation	in
the	political	landscape	on	the	basis	of	two	poles:
Putin	on	the	one	side	and	the	radical	opposition,
embodied	 by	 Bolotnaya,	 on	 the	 other.	 If	 the
Russian	 political	 geometry	 retains	 its	 bipolar
structure,	one	can	forecast	the	following	process:
the	revolutionary	‘Bolotnaya’	pole,	supported	by
the	infrastructure	and	its	potential	for	hegemony,
will	gradually	increase	this	potential,	using	any

failures	 on	 the	 part	 of	 the	 authorities	 to	 its
advantage,	and	the	authorities	(especially	if	they
use	 the	 first	 or	 the	 second	 scenario),	 on	 the
contrary,	will	gradually	lose	momentum.	In	this
situation	the	threat	to	the	very	existence	of	Russia
as	an	independent	state	will	grow	drastically.	The
current	bipolar	system	and	the	readiness	of	the
West	 and	 its	 agents	 of	 influence	 in	 the	 radical
opposition	to	start	a	revolutionary	dismantling	of
the	Russian	regime	is	a	very	serious	thing.	And	if
only	 two	 positions	 remain	 (Putin	 against	 the
Bolotnaya),	 the	 entire	 system	 will	 become
extremely	vulnerable.
This	is	why	it	is	urgently	necessary	to	form	a
third	pole	and	to	shift	to	a	new	political	geometry.
The	 third	 position	 has	 been	 ideologically
formulated	above	as	a	third	scenario	for	Putin,	but
the	possibility	that	Putin	may	reject	it	and	will
not	go	in	this	direction	should	not	be	disregarded.
In	fact,	such	an	outcome	is	highly	probable.	And

if	Putin	does	not	go	the	patriotic	way,	it	must	be
carried	out	by	others.
Russia	3
Today	 we	 crucially	 need	 Russia	 3,	 the	 third
position,	 which	 is	 different	 both	 from	 Putin’s
Russia	1	and	the	Russia	2	of	the	Bolotnaya.	The
West	 strives	 for	 global	 domination	 anyway
(either	 expressly	 or	 by	 implication)	 so	 in	 any
country,	especially	in	a	key	country	like	Russia,
there	 is	 always	 ‘the	 fifth	 column’.	 This	 is
inevitable.	Moreover,	this	‘fifth	column’	usually
acts	 on	 both	 sides	 of	 the	 state:	 from	 the
opposition	and	from	inside	the	centre	of	power
itself.	 The	 US	 and	 its	 NATO	 partners	 have
extensive	experience	in	this	respect.
Russia	2	will	be	actively	engaged	in	disrupting
Russia’s	 statehood,	 continuing	 the	 series	 of
destructive	processes	that	were	begun	in	the	late
1980s.	 This	 Russia	 2,	 without	 counting	 on	 the

half-hearted,	 compromise-prone	 and	 hesitant
Russia	 1,	 must	 be	 confronted	 by	 Russia	 3.	 Its
mission	and	meaning	is	to	decisively	combat	the
agents	 of	 global	 hegemony	 inside	 Russia,	 both
among	the	radical	opposition	and	in	the	segment
which	acts	from	inside	the	regime,	betraying	the
country’s	national	interests.
A	 determined	 ‘anti-Bolotnaya’	 patriotic
movement	 must	 be	 created	 today,	 with	 a	 clear
goal:	 effective	 resistance	 against	 the	 ‘colour
revolution’,	directed	not	so	much	against	Putin	as
a	 personality	 and	 politician,	 as	 against	 Russia
herself;	 the	 realisation	 of	 the	 five	 points
described	in	the	third	scenario.
Today	Russia	needs	strong,	supreme	Russian
power	as	urgently	as	it	ever	has.	Whether	it	will
be	born	through	Putin’s	(Russia	1’s)	awakening	or
emerge	as	a	separate	phenomenon,	independent	of
Putin,	 remains	 to	 be	 seen.	 In	 any	 case,
preservation	of	the	bipolar	model	—	the	Russia	of

Putin	and	the	Russia	of	the	opposition	—	is	fatal
in	the	current	situation.
If	the	Bolotnaya	opposition	manages	to	present
the	 situation	 as	 a	 confrontation	 between	 the
regime	 and	 the	 dissatisfied,	 protesting	 masses
who	are	crying	for	justice,	this	alone	will	become
a	significant	victory	for	them.	On	the	other	hand,
the	people	who	care	about	their	country	cannot
just	relax,	doing	nothing	and	trying	to	figure	out
what	 decision	 will	 be	 made	 by	 Putin	 after	 4
March.	What	if	he	makes	the	wrong	decision?
Under	bipolar	politics	the	entire	critical	capital
derived	 from	 Putin’s	 various	 mistakes	 and
hesitant	moves	from	his	unconvincing	personnel
appointments	  and	  failing	  anti-corruption
campaigns	will	be	automatically	appropriated	by
Russia	 2,	 for	 the	 benefit	 of	 global	 hegemony.
Sooner	or	later	this	process	will	reach	its	critical
point	where	the	existence	of	a	free,	united	and
sovereign	 Russia	 will	 be	 problematic.	 The

‘inertial’	 (and,	 sadly,	 most	 likely)	 scenario
regarding	Putin’s	behaviour	will	imminently	lead
to	this	situation.	And	if	a	third	position	emerges
with	a	clear-cut	programme	using	the	five	points
above,	as	well	as	trustworthy	leaders,	at	least	the
two	 poles	 will	 be	 strengthened	 simultaneously:
the	‘Bolotnaya’	pole	and	the	patriotic	pole	(‘anti-
orange’	or	Poklonnaya).
[331]
	
Conservative	Revolution	as	the	Best
Scenario	for	Russia
The	 formation	 of	 the	 third	 patriotic	 force	 is	 a
national	 imperative.	 This	 force	 will	 drastically
change	 the	 political	 map	 of	 Russia.	 Russia	 2
blackmails	Putin,	demanding	‘more	democracy’.
Russia	3,	the	patriotic	Russia,	must	demand	from
Putin	 ‘more	 patriotism’.	 If	 Putin	 effectively
restrains	the	Bolotnaya	and	defends	the	country’s
interests,	the	patriots	will	support	him,	as	they	did
at	Poklonnaya	Gora.	Should	he	hesitate,	Russia	3

must	 pressure	 the	 authorities.	 In	 a	 critical
situation	 we	 should	 be	 ready	 to	 enter	 a	 tough
confrontation	 with	 the	 internal	 and	 external
enemies	and	even	seize	power,	if	necessary.		
The	 only	 correct	 and	 helpful	 scenario	 for
Russia	 after	 4	 March	 must	 be	 written	 by
ourselves.	 We	 must	 pull	 ourselves	 together,
summon	our	courage	and	raise	the	Russian	flag	of
revival,	 struggle	 and	 victory	 high	 above	 our
agonised	society.	It	is	wrong	and	irresponsible	in
such	 a	 critical	 situation	 to	 leave	 the	 country’s
future	in	the	hands	of	any	one	man.
Conservatives	 are	 habitually	 loyal	 to	 the
authorities.	They	can	easily	maintain	the	current
state	of	things.	But	when	this	state	of	things	is
crumbling	 before	 our	 very	 eyes	 and	 the
authorities	 are	 obviously	 incapable	 of	 stopping
the	forces	that	threaten	to	tear	everything	apart,	it
is	the	psychology	that	has	to	be	changed.	Today	a
conservative	 revolution	 is	 necessary,	 an

awakening	and	a	spiritual	uprising	of	those	who
are	devoted	to	Russia	and	are	ready	to	fight	for
her	 against	 the	 global	 hegemony	 at	 any	 cost.
Maybe	 it	 is	 the	 last	 battle.	 This	 thought	 has
inspired	numerous	generations	of	Russians	who
have	 furiously	 defended	 their	 motherland,	 its
freedom,	its	ideas,	and	its	missions.	The	people,
the	masses	should	return	to	politics	and	become	a
vital	 political	 force.	 Not	 the	 clownish	 Duma
opposition,	 acting	 as	 an	 appendix	 to	 either	 the
regime	 or	 Western	 hegemony,	 but	 the	 force	 of
genuine	Russia,	the	Third	Force.				
Necessity	of	Awakening:	The	Search	for	an
Idea
A	political	strategy	can	be	built	around	a	sound
national	 idea.	 That	 said,	 none	 of	 Russia’s	 four
presidents	 took	 the	 trouble	 to	 formulate	 it.
Basically,	 the	 country	 has	 been	 living	 in	 an
ideological	 vacuum	 since	 Gorbachev.	 The

absence	of	a	national	idea	in	Russia	is	sad	and
almost	criminal.	Paradoxically,	this	national	idea
is	 right	 there	 on	 the	 surface.	 The	 basis	 of	 the
Russian	ideology	could	be,	for	instance,	integrity
over	atomisation,	a	unique	historical	development
of	 the	 country,	 and	 a	 unique	 system	 of	 ethical
values.	A	moral	embodied	in	a	slogan	—	this	is
what	makes	the	national	idea.	But	in	Russia	such
a	delicate	thing	as	ideology	is	delegated	to	spin
doctors,	puppet	masters	and	managers.			
The	 reason	 for	 this	 is	 that	 Vladimir	 Putin
underestimates	the	importance	of	the	notion	of	an
‘idea’.	He	is	an	ingenious	pragmatist,	but	ideas
don’t	matter	to	him,	especially	compared	to,	say,
American	neoconservatives,	who	understand	how
potent	ideas	can	be...	
Today	we	are	witnessing	an	almost	exact	rerun
of	the	situation	of	the	late	1980s,	when	the	Soviet
authorities	 were	 formally	 in	 control	 of	 the
situation	but	did	not	know	what	to	make	of	it.	All

resources	 were	 directed	 at	 solving	 purely
technical	 tasks.	 Society	 was	 consumed	 with
apathy	 and	 resentment.	 Besides,	 a	 small	 but
closely-knit	 group	 of	 Western-oriented	 ‘liberal
intelligentsia’	(‘little	people’)	was	ideologically
mobilised	to	topple	the	system	and	destroy	the
state.	 The	 entire	 process	 was	 supervised	 from
abroad.	The	silent	Russian	people	did	not	want
this	 destruction,	 in	 fact	 they	 voted	 for	 the
preservation	of	the	USSR	in	March	1991,
[332]
	but
they	were	dissatisfied	with	the	situation	and	did
not	intend	to	defend	the	status	quo.	The	repressive
apparatus	was	on	the	side	of	the	authorities	and
the	historical	initiative	on	the	side	of	the	rebelling
Westernists.
What	did	it	all	amount	to	in	1991?	It	amounted
to	the	collapse	of	the	USSR,	the	creation	of	an
antisocial	and	unfair	oligarchic	capitalist	system,
the	 start	 of	 Russia’s	 disintegration,	 the
destruction	 of	 socialism	 and	 the	 coming	 of	 the

roaring	 1990s,	 which	 was	 the	 triumph	 of	 the
comprador	 bourgeois	 and	 Russophobe	 elites.
Ekho	Moskvy	and	its	ideology	have	secured	their
power.
In	1999,	Putin	‘froze’	the	situation,	but	he	did
not	 reverse	 it.	 At	 first	 it	 seemed	 that	 he	 was
waiting	for	the	right	moment.	Then	it	seemed	that
he	was	wasting	his	time.	The	Dmitry	Medvedev
scam	was	meant	as		a	product	for	export:	the	US
saw	 that	 Russia	 was	 headed	 by	 a	 ‘liberal’	 and
eased	 their	 pressure	 on	 Russia,	 expecting	 that
during	the	second	term	this	‘liberal’	would	ruin
the	country	himself.	The	ultra-liberal	opposition,
hypnotised	 by	 the	 Institute	 of	 Contemporary
Development,	believed	the	same	thing.	All	of	this
worked,	and	Putin	organised	his	legal	return,	and
the	West	had	nothing	to	do	but	to	accept	it.
But	 these	 complex	 manipulations	 with	 the
liberals	and	the	West	left	the	people	and	the	Idea
unattended.	 They	 were	 rendered	 a	 zero.

Machiavelli	warned	that	the	worst	thing	a	ruler
can	do	is	believe	in	his	own	lies...		
So,	what	did	Putin	Fail	to	Do?
First,	he	did	not	propose	an	Idea	for	society,	only
techniques.	 This	 is	 why	 politics	 in	 Russia	 was
given	 away	 to	 spin	 doctors	 and	 PR	 specialists.
This	was	a	fatal	underestimation	of	the	power	of
ideas.
Second,	Putin	failed	to	develop	a	strategy	and
responds	only	to	current	challenges.	He	does	not
have	an	idea	for	the	future	of	Russia.	He	has	only
a	 limited	 understanding	 of	 the	 contemporary
world.	 This	 world	 is	 very	 deceitful,	 complex,
dynamic	 and	 aggressive.	 In	 order	 to	 correctly
manoeuvre	in	it,	one	should	analyse	it	closely	and
deeply.	
Third,	 Putin	 failed	 to	 implement	 a	 practical
rotation	of	the	elites	over	the	last	thirteen	years.
The	 ruling	 elite	 was	 formed	 in	 the	 1990s	 and

maintains	its	destructive	and	privatising	mission:
hence	the	rampant	corruption.	Putin	did	not	raise
‘new	 people’,	 he	 only	 gathered	 an	 additional
group	 which	 is	 working	 under	 the	 same	 old
conditions	and	rules.
Fourth,	 Putin	 did	 not	 create	 foreign	 policy
instruments	capable	of	an	efficient	confrontation
with	Western	hegemony.	He	either	 played	 with
the	West	or	avoided	it,	or	sharply	criticised	it.	It
was	unclear	whether	Russia	was	saying	‘yes’	or
‘no’	 to	 the	 existing	 world	 order.	 Maybe	 Putin
thought	that	this	uncertainty	would	give	him	free
reign.	 It	 is	 possible	 but	 at	 the	 same	 time	 it
blindfolds	him.
Fifth,	 Putin	 did	 not	 give	 the	 people	 the
principal	things	they	needed:	the	satisfaction	of
their	 sense	 of	 right	 and	 wrong,	 and	 the	 feeling
that	 social	 policy	 and	 solidarity	 were	 in	 place.
Putin	was	afraid	of	a	direct	appeal	to	socialism.
The	people	expected	him	to	do	that	but	they	did

not	get	what	they	wanted.
Sixth,	 Putin	 did	 not	 even	 start	 to	 seriously
analyse	 ethnic	 problems	 and	 the	 issue	 of
nationalities.	In	this	sphere	a	hands-off	approach
was	taken.	After	a	decisive	victory	in	Chechnya
and	 stripping	 the	 Federation’s	 subjects	 of	 their
claims	to	sovereignty	(which	were	the	biggest	and
most	 genuine	 achievements	 of	 his	 presidency),
Putin	did	not	formulate	a	project	of	inter-ethnic
balance	 nor	 a	 national	 model	 of	 political
organisation.	Multi-ethnic	Russia,	in	the	context
of	 an	 objective	 worsening	 in	 terms	 of
immigration,	 found	 herself	 in	 an	 explosive
situation.
Seventh,	 Putin	 preferred	 to	 distance	 himself
from	society	by	way	of	adopting	a	mass	media
policy	 of	 the	 lowest	 order.	 The	 media	 has
systematically	lowered	the	cultural	bar,	corrupts
the	masses,	and	their	control	over	political	topics
only	 aggravates	 the	 situation:	 the	 masses	 are

subjected	to	entertaining	programmes	of	forceful
idiotisation,	 and	 political	 discourse	 is	 strictly
controlled.
Eighth,	 Putin	 delegated	 the	 management	 of
science	 and	 education	 to	 highly	 incompetent
figures,	 who	 almost	 destroyed	 the	 existing
system,	clumsily	copying	the	Western	pattern.	As
a	result	of	their	experiments	Russia’s	intellectual
potential	rapidly	dwindled.
This	 is	 how	 Putin	 returned	 and	 continues	 to
act,	 fully	 armed	 with	 these	 fatal	 mistakes.	 He
remains	without	any	idea	or	strategy,	an	adequate
elite,	a	proper	foreign	policy,	a	socially	oriented
domestic	 policy,	 a	 model	 for	 the	 national
organisation	of	society,	nor	a	mass	media	with	a
culture-forming	 mission,	 amidst	 intellectual
degradation.
Who	is	to	blame?	I	think	Putin	himself.	He
coped	with	one	historical	challenge	in	the	early
2000s,	and	failed	to	cope	with	the	other.	He	was

marked	 by	 indecisiveness,	 hesitation,	 the
selection	 of	 the	 wrong	 strategies	 and	 good-for-
nothing	 cadres.	 Yes,	 his	 entourage,	 who	 are
responsible	 for	 the	 supervision	 of	 political
processes,	deceives	him.	But	this	just	means	that
he	wants	to	be	deceived	and	does	not	want	to	face
the	 truth.	 Putin	 must	 have	 a	 constructive	 plan.
The	 situation	 could	 only	 be	 saved	 if	 the
authorities	wake	up.	Anything	else	will	aggravate
it	and	make	it	all	the	more	catastrophic.	Those
who	 act	 against	 Putin	 are	 mortal	 enemies	 of
Russia.	Their	successes	are	incompatible	with	our
lives	and	with	the	country’s	existence,	but	the	fact
that	 these	 forces	 are	 looming	 again	 is	 Putin’s
fault.
Corrections	of	Mistakes:	Is	This	Scenario
Realistic?
There	is	one	last	thing:	the	immediate	creation	of
a	third	force	is	crucial.	It	must	stand	against	the

rebelling	 ultra-liberals	 and	 the	 American
networks	 of	 agents	 both	 inside	 the	 dissenting
opposition	 and	 the	 Putin	 administration	 itself
(where	they	are	aplenty),	as	well	as	against	those
mistakes	 of	 Putin’s	 which	 are	 impossible	 to
accept	and	justify	and	which	can	easily	become
fatal	for	the	country.	Apart	from	Putin-Medvedev
with	 their	 clique,	 Navalny-Nemtsov-Kasyanov
with	 their	 clique	 should	 be	 opposed	 by	 a	 third
clique,	for	the	sake	of	the	empire,	social	justice,
culture,	 the	 Idea,	 national	 policy,	 strategy,	 a
radical	cleansing	of	the	elite	and	an	intellectual
revival.	
Putin’s	regime	is	not	very	inspiring	today.	But
it	is	Russia,	the	people,	the	Idea,	and	the	future
horizon	that	are	inspiring.	They	are	worth	fighting
for	with	one’s	life.	We	lost	our	country	twice:	in
1991	and	in	1993.	We	lost	to	the	same	forces:
Ekho	 Moskvy,	 pro-Western	 liberals,	 the	 ‘little
people’,
[333]
	and	the	American	agents	of	influence.

These	 same	 forces	 are	 preparing	 for	 the	 third
round:	the	collapse	of	Russia	is	ahead.	They	will
overthrow	Putin	and	the	country	(or	what	will	be
left	of	it)	will	perish	under	the	rubble.	This	is	just
a	revenge	project	by	the	forces	that	were	staved
off	for	a	time	in	the	1990s.	Putin	did	not	finish
them	off.	He	did	not	break	their	necks.	So	now
they	are	sticking	them	out	again.	
The	Putin	that	we	have	Lost:
Criticisms	from	Above
The	emergence	of	Vladimir	Putin	in	the	Russian
political	arena	thirteen	years	ago	and	his	current
‘semi-silence’	 is	 enigmatic.	 Nobody	 could
understand	who	he	was.	Is	he	a	Russian	patriot
and	 a	 loyal	 initiate	 into	 the	 secret	 service	 who
skilfully	 uses	 a	 liberal’s	 mask	 and	 only	 rarely
shows	his	true	colours	(or	more	precisely,	his	iron
face)	 or,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 is	 he	 a	 pro-Western
liberal,	subtly	disguised	as	an	enforcement	agent

and	a	supporter	of	empire,	but	at	critical	moments
always	relieving	the	tension	in	relations	with	the
West	and	signalling:	‘I	am	your	man!’	Putin	is
still	elusive,	contradictory	and	mysterious.
After	coming	to	power	he	made	a	drastic	leap,
which	became	a	distinctive	feature	of	his	epoch	as
contrasted	with	the	Gorbachev	and	Yeltsin	era.	He
took	 a	 90-degree	 turn	 in	 his	 course.	 He
maintained	 capitalism,	 liberalism,	 and	 the
Western	orientation	(as	well	as	the	other	‘joys’	of
the	1990s:	the	oligarchy,	corruption,	the	cynical
comprador	 elite,	 the	 elimination	 of	 morals	 and
the	national	spirit,	the	monstrous	media,	etc.),	but
at	the	same	time	he	stopped	the	disintegration	of
Russia,	the	intra-oligarchical	wars	through	the	use
of	political	parties	and	federal	TV	channels,	the
rebellious	 provinces	 and	 governors,	 the	 war	 in
Chechnya	 (which	 he	 won),	 and	 the	 national
republics’	 claims	 to	 sovereignty.	 After	 such	 a
good	 start	 it	 seemed	 that	 the	 remaining	 90

degrees	were	not	far	off	and	that	Putin	would	just
as	 quickly	 build	 an	 empire,	 integrate	 the	 post-
Soviet	 space,	 arm	 himself	 with	 a	 Eurasian
ideology,	 restore	 the	 status	 of	 religion	 and
tradition,	start	reviving	the	culture,	and	restart	the
education	of	the	spirit,	values	and	customs	of	the
people.	But,	alas,	that	was	not	to	be.
Making	 a	 sharp	 90-degree	 bank	 towards	 the
1990s,	 Putin	 suddenly	 stopped	 equally	 sharply.
He	deviated	from	the	previous	course	by	precisely
90	degrees,	but	no	more	and	no	less.	The	formula
was	discovered:	‘liberalism	+	patriotism’.	It	was
supposed	 to	 develop	 towards	 a	 consistent	 and
consummate	 Eurasian	 patriotic	 position.	 Putin
managed	 to	 balance	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the
contradictory	 ‘liberalism	 +	 patriotism’	 position
for	as	long	as	he	wanted.	He	made	society	accept
this	particular	Putin	as	an	integral	phenomenon.
The	ultra-liberal	view	him	as	a	‘dictator’.	This	is
not	true.	Putin	prefers	to	act	softly	and	uses	force

only	in	extreme	cases.	He	does	not	like	violence
and	resorts	to	it	only	in	very	rare	circumstances
which	directly	affect	the	interests	of	the	state.
The	 ultra-patriots	 view	 him	 as	 a	 liberal,	 an
‘agent	of	Western	influence’,	and	a	‘protégé		of
the	oligarchs	and	the	global	cabal’.	This	is	not
true	either.	The	West	hates	Putin:	he	is	a	genuine
threat	to	the	global	domination	of	the	American
empire.	 The	 West	 would	 give	 (and	 gives)
anything	to	eliminate	him.
Putin	 is	 seen	 as	 a	 patriot	 and	 a	 nationalist.
Seemingly	that	is	not	true	either.	An	unexplained
sphinx?	In	fact,	Putin’s	mystery	can	be	solved	and
we	seem	to	be	close	to	its	solution.
Putin’s	New	Formula?
The	first	year	of	Putin’s	third	presidency	made	it
absolutely	clear	for	me	personally	why	there	was
an	aura	of	uncertainty	around	this	figure.	Is	spite
of	 Putin’s	 repeated	 explanations	 of	 his	 course,

both	 Russia	 and	 the	 West	 are	 still	 expecting
surprises	from	him.	The	element	of	uncertainty
was	 a	 specific	 trait	 in	 the	 style	 of	 Putin’s
presidency	in	recent	years.
Today	I	can	say	who	Putin	is.	This	is	no	longer
a	mystery	to	me.	In	my	opinion,	if	one	sums	up
the	principal	aspects	of	his	behaviour	during	the
first	two	terms	of	his	presidency,	his	ministerial
term	and	the	first	year	of	his	third	term,	one	will
come	 to	 the	 following	 conclusion:	 Putin
constitutes	a	classical	realist	politician.
What	is	Realism?
I	 have	 recently	 written	 a	 new	 textbook	 on	 the
theory	 of	 international	 relations	 —	 a	 scientific
discipline/subject	 which	 was	 developed	 in
England	after	the	Second	World	War.	Realism	in
international	 relations	 is	 not	 simply	 household
realism	 or	 realism	 in	 painting,	 and	 not	 the	 so-
called	Realpolitik.	 The	 best	 interpretations	 of

realism	are	given	by	the	classical	authors	of	this
subdivision	 of	 international	 politics:	 Hans
Morgenthau,
[334]
	Edward	Carr,
[335]
	Henry	Kissinger
and	 their	 neo-realist	 followers:	 Kenneth
Waltz,
[336]
	   Robert	   Gilpin,
[337]
	   John
Mearsheimer,
[338]
	and	Stephen	Krasner.
[339]
The	core	of	realism	in	international	relations
and,	more	broadly,	in	politics,	is	the	principle	of	a
contemporary	national	state	as	the	 major	 actor.
For	 realists,	 the	 entire	 sphere	 of	 international
relations	is,	absolutely	and	exclusively,	an	arena
of	the	interaction	of	sovereign	states.	As	regards
international	relations,	liberals	add	to	the	list	of
actors	 of	 international	 politics	 the	 transnational
corporations	and	Non-governmental
organisations,	 and	 Marxists	 add	 international
organisations	that	are	created	on	the	basis	of	class
distinctions	and	which	are	beyond	the	borders	of
nation-states.
Three	Principles	of	Realism:	Sovereignty,

Three	Principles	of	Realism:	Sovereignty,
the	Prince,	Leviathan
Realism	is	based	on	the	three	main	political	and
philosophical	 principles:	Leviathan,	The	 Prince	
of	 Machiavelli	 and	 ‘sovereignty’	 as	 defined	 by
Jean	 Bodin),	 which	 underlie	 the	 theory	 of	 the
contemporary	 state	 and	 became	 the	 basis	 of
European	 international	 law	 (Jus	 Publicum
Europeum)	secured	in	the	Westphalian	system.					
			
Realism	in	international	relations	is	based	on
the	premise	that	human	nature	is	imperfect,	that
humans	are	prone	to	sin	and	weaknesses,	and	that
there	 is	 permanent	 discord	 between	 people
(Hobbes’	 thesis	Homo	homini	lupus	est:	‘man	is
wolf	 to	 man’).	 The	 state	 and	 society	 exist
precisely	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 maintaining	 the
individual	in	a	neutral	state,	or	at	least	to	try	to
prevent	 him	 from	 total	 disintegration,	 if	 not
improve	him.

A	pessimistic	view	of	man,	expressed	in	the
idea	that	an	individual	who	receives	freedom	will
most	likely	engage	in	evil	and	unacceptable	acts,
underlies	realism’s	treatment	of	politics.	Realism
declares	the	necessity	of	the	state	not	only	for	the
solution	of	foreign	policy	issues	(where	chaos	and
violence	reign	in	the	relations	between	states),	but
also	 as	 an	 instrument	 of	 domestic	 policy:
restraining	 the	 individual	 from	 irreparably
harming	 himself	 and	 his	 neighbours.	 The	 state
must	 save	 man	 from	 the	 dark	 side	 of	 his	 own
nature.	 People	 should	 voluntarily,	 through	 a
social	contract,	delegate	part	of	their	powers	and
the	option	to	be	in	charge	of	their	own	freedom	to
a	 strong	 state,	 Leviathan,	 and	 should	 laws	 be
violated,	 the	 state	 ensures	 their	 observance.	As
Max	Weber
[340]
	noted,	the	state	becomes	the	only
institute	 of	 natural	 and	 legitimate	 violence,
because	 it	 is	 a	 product	 of	 agreement	 and	 an
embodiment	 of	 rationality	 in	 man,	 who	 thus

overcomes	his	natural	(beastly)	state.
Unlike	 the	 traditional	 medieval	 state	 and,
especially,	 an	 empire,	 Leviathan	 does	 not	 have
any	special	mission,	a	spiritual	or	historical	goal,
or	a	divine	purpose.	Leviathan	does	not	intend	to
improve	 human	 nature,	 it	 simply	 prevents
anarchy	and	man’s	extermination	of	man.	This	is
the	beginning	and	the	end	of	its	function.	Besides,
Leviathan	is	created	from	below,	 is	 man-made,
and	is	the	product	of	a	rational	interpretation	of
his	nature.	This	is	how	the	state	was	interpreted	in
politics	in	the	modern	era.
[341]
				
The	next	principle	of	realism	in	international
politics	 is	 the	 sovereignty	 of	 Jean	 Bodin.	 It
argued	 that	 a	 sovereign	 ruler	 is	 a	 ruler	 above
whom	there	is	no	superior	authority	apart	from
God.	Boden	developed	the	idea	of	the	state	as	an
artificial	organisation	of	life	along	rational	lines
whose	 supreme	 value	 is	 sovereignty	 as	 an
absolute	landmark	in	foreign	policy.	This	means

that	 there	 is	 no	 superior	 legitimate	 authority
above	the	state	which	would	oblige	it	to	behave	in
a	certain	way	in	the	international	arena.
The	figure	of	the	prince	or	the	‘new	prince’
created	by	Niccolò	Machiavelli	represented	not	a
traditional	monarch	whose	rule	was	guaranteed	by
social	and	political	inertia,	but	a	political	figure
facing	the	task	of	creating	a	state	and	a	political
system	from	scratch	with	the	aid	of	his	will	and
his	mind.	Here	Machiavelli	faced	a	problem	of
substantiating	 and	 validating	 political	 creativity
based	on	rationality,	will	and	efficiency.
The	 contemporary	 state	 is	 seen	 (or
constructed)	 by	 him	 as	 a	 new	 political	 object,
something	that	had	not	previously	existed	during
the	 Middle	 Ages	 and	 in	 ancient	 times,	 and
represents	 an	 apparatus	 for	 the	 efficient
organisation	of	society	in	the	interests	of	the	ruler
(new	 prince).	 The	 new	 prince,	 unlike	 the	 old
prince,	must	not	only	preserve	power	in	a	given

society	with	deeply	rooted	traditions	and	customs,
which	he	has	to	observe,	but	he	must	create	this
society	and	these	customs,	secure	his	power	and
demonstrate	his	efficiency	in	practice.
[342]
Machiavelli’s	state	does	not	have	any	purpose
apart	from	being	a	power	instrument	of	the	‘new
prince’;	 therefore	 all	 its	 institutions	 and
principles	should	mandatorily	have	a	rational	end
and	 constantly	 prove	 their	 efficiency.	 The
volitional	 character	 of	 the	 new	 prince’s	 rule	 is
responsible	for	changing	the	political	rules	at	a
time	when	it	is	justified	by	certain	purposes.	The
state	 is	 seen	 as	 a	 fully	 instrumental	 power
mechanism,	where	everything	comes	down	to	the
efficiency	with	which	the	ruling	elite	can	seize
and	 secure	 power.	 This	 leads	 to	 the	 optimal
organisation	 of	 the	 political	 situation	 aimed	 at
expanding	and	defending	the	national	territories,
as	 well	 as	 preventing	 civil	 revolts	 and	 the
collapse	of	the	state	or	a	military	defeat,	which

together	constitute	the	principal	responsibility	of
the	rulers	and	is	one	of	the	main	criteria	of	the
efficiency	and	stability	of	their	rule.
Realists	view	international	relations	as	a	field
of	anarchy	(chaos)	where	every	actor	(the	state)
pursues	 his	 own	 self-interests.	 Therefore	 a	 war
between	sovereign	states	is	a	natural	expression
of	the	very	nature	of	international	relations	as	a
battle	 between	 Leviathans.	 There	 is	 no	 higher
instance	than	the	state,	and	its	relations	with	other
states	are	driven	only	by	its	interests,	wishes	and
possibilities,	which	are	determined	and	realised
by	the	political	elite,	that	is	the	Prince,	who	is
capable	 of	 proving	 the	 efficiency	 of	 his	 rule,
maintaining	power	and	securing	his	desired	goals
by	any	means.
Putin	—	an	Absolute	Realist
The	 description	 of	 realism	 in	 the	 Ministry	 of
Defence’s	textbook	and	the	model	of	Putin’s	rule

show	a	striking	convergence.	Everything	matches
to	 the	 smallest	 detail.	 Putin’s	 behaviour
throughout	 all	 the	 preceding	 stages	 and	 at	 the
present	stage	is	fully	integrated	into	the	model	of
realism,	 with	 all	 its	 principles	 including	 those
corresponding	to	Leviathan,	sovereignty,	and	the
new	prince.	In	reality	Putin,	in	spite	of	all	societal
expectations	 and	 the	 smoke	 and	 mirrors,
ultimately	has	no	long-term	messianic	ideology.
In	 fact	 he	 considers	 the	 state	 as	 a	 manmade,
rational,	and	pragmatic	structure	that	is	designed
primarily	 for	 the	 protection	 of	 the	 sovereignty
entrusted	to	it	by	Russian	society.	Putin	relies	on
absolute	state	sovereignty	and	does	not	recognise
the	 legitimacy	 of	 the	 demands	 made	 by	 the
international	 community.	 Just	 like	 any	 realist,
including	 American	 ones,	 he	 equates	 the
decisions	 made	 by	 international	 institutions	 to
nothing.	Resolutions	like	the	Kyoto	Protocol
[343]
and	the	Strasbourg	court
[344]
	are	absolutely	non-

binding	for	him.	The	principle	of	a	unipolar	world
as	well	as	that	of	a	world	arbitrarily	divided	into
several	poles	are	equally	unacceptable	to	him.
Putin	is	entirely	convinced	that	the	principles
of	 sovereignty	 preclude	 the	 implementation	 of
legal	pressures	against	any	state	or	its	ruler	by
international	 institutions.	 He	 shares	 beliefs
commonly	 attributed	 to	 modernism:	 that	 the
relatively	stable	world	order	relies	on	balancing
the	principle	of	state	sovereignty	and	the	structure
of	 international	 law.	 It	 is	 thanks	 to	 this	 that
Russia	did	not	surrender	its	nuclear	weapons	and
maintains	 a	 strong	 potential	 to	 enforce	 its
sovereignty.	It	is	the	fact	that	Russia	is	the	only
country	aside	from	the	US	that	has	a	nuclear	triad
—	on	land,	in	the	sea,	and	in	the	air	—	that	allows
it	 to	 take	 an	 independent	 position	 in	 the
international	arena,	and	to	have	its	own	opinion
and	an	independent	foreign	policy.’	
[345]
Putin	 sees	 a	 potential	 to	 keep	 the	 economy

afloat	and	ensure	Russia’s	energy	sovereignty	by
utilising	the	country’s	abundant	natural	resources.
The	advantage	for	him	lies	in	Russia’s	thousand-
year	 tradition	 of	 independence	 (except	 for	 the
period	of	the	Tatar-Mongol	yoke),	as	well	as	the
deep	historical,	political,	and	ideological	roots	of
independence	 and	 sovereignty	 that	 lies	 in	 the
country’s	population	itself.
Putin	has	the	resources	to	carry	out	realistic
policies.	 In	 areas	 where	 they	 lack	 their	 own
forces,	realist	leaders	usually	resort	to	alliances
and	 manoeuvring.	 In	 this	 sense,	 Putin	 plays	 a
skilful	game	of	chess	in	relations	with	China,	the
other	modern	realist	government,	as	well	as	with
Iran	and	other	countries.	He	does	not	confront	the
West	because	he	has	no	ideological	grounds	to	do
so.
In	 a	 complete	 spirit	 of	 realism,	 Putin	 is
inclined	 to	 consider	 international	 relations	 as
ruled	by	chaos	and	anarchy:	‘We	are	witnessing

chaos	 everywhere,	 and	 we	 do	 not	 consider	 the
position	 of	 our	 partners	 to	 be	 entirely	 correct.
Why	should	we	support	what	we	think	is	wrong?
Why	should	they	demand	that	we	implement	their
standards?	 Perhaps	 we	 will	 require	 them	 to
implement	 our	 standards?	 Let’s	 not	 demand
anything	from	each	other,	let’s	treat	each	other
with	respect.’
It	is	quite	obvious	that	all	Putin	has	done	in	the
past	and	all	he	is	doing	now	fits	completely	into
the	 classic	 understanding	 of	 realism	 in
international	relations.	And	just	as	two	points	are
enough	to	draw	a	straight	line,	these	facts	allow
us	to	make	the	following	prediction:	Putin	will
follow	 realist	 politics	 through	 to	 the	 very	 end.
Most	 likely,	 his	 successor	 in	 eleven	 years	 will
also	be	a	proponent	of	the	realist	trend.	This	is	a
defined	 and	 pre-determined	 vector.	 Of	 course,
realism	 as	 the	 future	 is	 not	 guaranteed	 in	 an
absolute	manner	because	the	unpredictability	of

world	 events	 in	 recent	 years	 and	 months	 may
interfere	with	this	process.
Therefore	it	seems	to	me	that	the	Putin	enigma
is	solved.	Putin	is	a	realist.	All	the	pros	and	cons,
advantages	 and	 limitations	 of	 his	 rule	 are
included	in	this	thesis.	This,	in	our	opinion,	is	an
axiom.
Thus,	we	live	in	a	realist	state	and	we	have
realist	 policies.	All	 those	 who	 are	 discontented
can	leave!	Anyone	wishing	to	voice	their	opinions
regarding	 alternative	 models	 of	 political	 policy
—	 for	 example,	 it	 is	 liberalism	 that	 usually
opposes	 realism	 but	 Marxism,	 postmodernism
and	positivism	can	also	be	that	opposition	—	are
welcome	to	the	theoretical	discussion.
Whether	 or	 not	 Putin	 will	 consider	 these
alternatives	depends	on	the	correctness	 of	 their
presentation	 and	 how	 respectful	 the	 dialogue
turns	out	to	be.	Today,	liberal	squawking	is	not
welcome	 and	 well-reasoned,	 rational	 counter-

realist	positions	may	well	be	considered....and	set
aside.
I	 think	 that	 Putin	 will	 no	 longer	 listen	 to
anyone	but	realists.	Earlier	he	pretended	that	he
was	listening	to	these	and	those	and	others,	but
now	the	subject	is	closed.
The	second	most	important	issue	is	whether	or
not	 the	 country	 has	 institutionalised	 Putin’s
realism.	If	we	look	carefully	at	the	dynamics	of
Russia	 in	 recent	 decades,	 we	 can	 see	 that	 its
liberal-democratic	 foreign	 policy	 era	 which
propounded	 ideas	 of	 state	 de-sovereignisation,
globalisation,	 integration	 into	 the	 world
community,	and	supranational	globalist	values	in
domestic	 politics	 was	 very	 short,	 only	 lasting
from	 1986	 to	 1996	 —	 between	 the	 end	 of	 the
Gorbachev	 era	 and	 before	 the	 Yeltsin	 period.
Beginning	 in	 1996,	 after	 Primakov	 became	 the
Minister	 of	 Foreign	Affairs	 in	 the	 late	Yeltsin
years,	Russian	policy	became	realist.	Under	Putin,

this	same	policy	has	practically	been	canonised.
During	 this	 time	 Russian	 society	 and	 its
communities	 of	 experts,	 the	 mass	 media,
journalism,	 and	 the	 entire	 educational	 structure
beginning	 with	 the	 Moscow	 State	 Institute	 of
International	 Relations	 (MGIMO)	 and	 ending
with	 any	 institution	 studying	 and	 analysing
international	 relations	 and	 international	 politics
were	 all	 dominated	 by	 this	 totalitarian	 liberal
discourse.	 	 In	 other	 words,	 realism	 became
Russia’s	dominant	foreign	policy	long	ago	but	is
still	not	reflected	in	its	social	institutions.	It	is
fundamentally	misunderstood	and	not	analysed	in
scientific	 ways,	 and	 it	 is	 ignored	 in	 higher
education.	We	are	governed	by	realists	and	they
define	 the	 course	 of	 our	 development,	 yet
reflection	concerning	and	the	institutionalisation
of	this	process	has	not	occurred.	The	theory	of
realism	 in	 international	 relations	 and	 in	 the
politics	of	the	new	post-Soviet	Russia	does	not

exist,	 and	 appropriate	 schools	 of	 thought	 and
concepts	have	not	been	created.	The	gap	between
Putin’s	 actual	 realism	 and	 the	 lack	 of
understanding	 and	 institutionalisation	 thereof
leads	 to	 falsification	 of	 the	 discourse.	 Putin’s
realism	 is	 often	 erroneously	 classified	 as
patriotism	 or	 nationalism.	 Substitution	 occurs.
Confusion	occurs.	Patriotism	is	emotion,	feeling,
a	choice	of	values,	the	love	of	country,	and	not	a
theory.	 Realism	 is	 a	 specific	 paradigm	 of
responsible,	coherent	behaviour	in	foreign	policy
and	 the	 proper	 theoretical	 conception	 of	 this
behaviour.	 Realism	 involves	 the	 estimation	 of
national	 interests	 in	 the	 classic	 scheme	 of
calculation	 and	 not	 in	 some	 emotional	 need,
looking	for	approval.	In	other	words,	realism	is	a
scientific,	  rational,	  reasonable,	  sensible
institutionalised	 position	 that	 can	 be	 analysed
while	  patriotism	  and	  nationalism	  are
controversial	 in	 terms	 of	 their	 coherence,	 are

haphazard,	and	are	emotionally	coloured	points	of
view.
It	 is	 wrong	 to	 characterise	 Putin	 as	 a
nationalist	 or	 a	 patriot.	 Putin	 conducts	 himself
precisely	as	a	realist,	but	one	who	behaves	as	a
realist	 in	 terms	 of	 the	 behaviourist	 model	 of
international	relations.	Everything	else	is	a	black
box.	We	do	not	know	what	is	on	his	mind,	and	we
do	 not	 want	 to	 know.	 As	 an	 actor,	 and	 as	 he
operates,	Putin	is	a	realist.	To	say	this	is	to	reveal
Putin’s	algorithm.	I	believe	during	the	time	when
Putin	revealed	himself	as	a	realist,	he	already	had
no	 need	 for	 the	 smokescreen	 of	 liberalism	 in
international	relations.	(Incidentally	in	this	sense,
institutions	 such	 as	 the	 MGIMO	 in	 its	 present
condition,	with	liberal	faculties	and	educational
systems	offering	no	alternatives	to	liberalism	or
residual	 Marxism	 as	 norms	 for	 modern
international	  relations,	  are	  completely
unacceptable.)

A	 new	 model	 for	 understanding	 modern
processes	 based	 on	 the	 paradigm	 of	 realism	 is
necessary	 in	 global	 politics.	 We	 do	 not	 have	 a
conceptualised	 Russian	 realism	 or	 a	 Russian
answer	 to	 neo-realist	 models,	 such	 as	 those	 of
Kenneth	 Waltz	 (the	 unipolar	 world),	 Richard
Gilpin	 (the	 theory	 of	 hegemonic	 stability),	 or
other	 Western	 developments.	 Russian	 realism
should	carefully	consider	a	number	of	neo-realist
schemes	describing	the	modern	world.	I	believe
that	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 tasks	 of	 the
modern	 era	 is	 the	 institutionalisation	 of	 a	 non-
politically	 biased,	 scientific,	 cold,	 abstract,
rigorous,	balanced,	and	hyper-reactionary	Russian
realism.
I	often	participate	in	discussions	with	different
experts	 and	 am	 amazed	 that	 the	 people
representing	our	country	at	the	international	level
have	never	even	heard	of	Morgenthau	and	believe
that	the	defence	of	state	and	national	interests	is

equivalent	 to	 fascism.	 Such	 specialists	 are	 too
incompetent	to	be	tolerated	in	the	classroom,	let
alone	represent	our	country	in	 the	 international
arena.	 We	 need	 to	 eliminate	 these	 losers	 as	 a
class.	A	society	that	does	not	ostracise	these	types
is	 absolutely	 sick.	 We	 have	 lots	 of	 these
anomalies,	but	as	the	nature	of	Russian’s	foreign
policy	discussion	becomes	something	outrageous,
the	time	has	come	to	eliminate	them.	Our	theories
are	 dominated	 by	 an	 unchallenged,	 haphazard
liberalism	in	international	affairs	that	is	poised	to
infect	us	like	a	virus.	The	impression	is	that	our
experts	simply	belch	liberal	jargon,	spew	it	forth,
and	do	so	without	even	knowing	or	realising	it.
By	 this	 token,	 the	 institutionalisation	 of
Russian-style	 realism	 will	 benefit	 Russian
liberalism	 in	 international	 relations	 because
liberal	discourse,	as	it	appears	on	screens	and	in
the	press,	is	simply	an	affront	to	human	dignity.
The	global	discourse	of	liberalism	in	international

relations,	which	incidentally	is	rather	rational	and
well-reasoned,	is	nowhere	to	be	found	in	Russia
and	will	not	be	even	in	the	long	term.	However,	in
order	 to	 begin	 the	 process	 of	 bringing	 Russian
political	 science	 in	 line	 with	 the	 world’s
standards	 of	 rationality,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	de-
monopolise	 liberal	 discourse	 in	 international
relations	and	institutionalise	realism.
One	more	thing	which	seems	very	important	to
me	is	a	behavioural	analysis	of	Putin’s	domestic
policy.	Until	now,	we	have	claimed	that	Putin	is	a
realist	in	international	relations.	This	claim	can
be	taken	differently,	but	there	are	things	that	need
to	 be	 taken	 as	 evident,	 scientifically	 true	 and
ostensive	 facts.	 ‘Putin	 is	 a	 realist.’	 This	 is	 an
ostensive	 fact.	 However,	 this	 is	 in	 regard	 to
international	relations.
Who	is	Putin	with	regard	to	domestic	policy?
They	will	say,	‘a	conservative’.	This	concept	is
vague,	  requiring	  additional	  commentary,

especially	since	conservatives	are	susceptible	to
conservative	 strife.	 This	 is	 a	 paradox.	 Western
political	 science	 does	 not	 know	 the	 domestic
politics	 of	 realism.	 However,	 in	 Russia,	 such	 a
phenomenon	is	possible.	In	Russia,	everything	is
not	as	it	is	in	the	West.	Here	Communists	go	to
church.	 Here	 the	 liberal	 democratic	 party	 is
neither	 liberal	 nor	 democratic,	 and	 attempts	 to
establish	 such	 a	 political	 party	 generally	 lead
absolutely	nowhere.
Perhaps	 Russia	 has	 its	 own	 political	 path,	 a
Sonderweg,	a	‘special	way’.	Where	this	will	lead
and	what	will	be	the	outcome,	whether	there	are
one,	one	hundred	or	no	parties	at	all,	or	whether
or	not	any	of	them	will	smarten	up	or	continue	to
act	like	the	sheep	they	are	today	is	as	absolutely
unpredictable	as	chaos.	Maybe	the	leader	of	the
LDPR,	Zhirinovsky,	will	remain	in	power	another
fifteen	terms	and	will	continue	to	make	jokes	as
he	edges	closer	to	death.	Maybe	he	will	depart

much	 earlier	 due	 to	 health	 issues	 seeing	 how
twenty	 years	 ago	 he	 once	 required	 urgent
hospitalisation.
True,	 many	 other	 Russian	 politicians	 also
periodically	require	hospitalisation	and	are	then
released	 again.	 Everything	 in	 Russia	 is
unpredictable.	 Maybe	 this	 is	 the	 way	 things
should	be,	since	any	an	attempt	to	hold	people	in
Russia	accountable	for	their	words	always	fails.
This	 has	 applied	 to	 all	 of	 our	 politicians
beginning	with	the	former	Komsomols
[346]
	and	the
Communists,	then	the	former	liberal	democrats,
and	 now	 today	 it	 is	 the	 Putin	 conservatives.
Therefore,	 essentially,	 no	 one.	 The	 West	 never
encountered	 such	 a	 situation.	 This	 complete
disregard	for	any	rational	installations	in	party-
political	and	ideological	behaviour	is	a	peculiarly
Russian	phenomenon.
I	believe	Putin	operates	precisely	as	a	realist	in
domestic	 politics.	 Realising	 that	 the	 Russian

ideology	 is	 generally	 difficult	 to	 understand,
Putin	 has	 created	 his	 own	 political	 model.	 In
foreign	policy	he	began	to	act	along	the	rational,
Western	 model	 of	 realism	 in	 international
relations	and	everything	has	turned	out	well.	Then
he	also	decided	to	act	in	the	spirit	of	realism	in
domestic	politics.
Once,	 about	 six	 years	 ago,	 one	 high-ranking
official	in	the	Kremlin	surprised	me	by	saying,
‘We	 owe	 everything	 to	 Carl	 Schmitt.’	 I	 asked,
‘And	do	you	know	who	introduced	Carl	Schmitt
into	 the	 Russian	 political	 context?’	 It	 was	 not
important	 that	 the	 official	 did	 not	 know	 who
introduced	Schmitt’s	ideas	to	the	Russian	public,
or	 who	 first	 published	 his	 works	 here.
(incidentally,	this	was	Carl	Schmitt’s	essay,	The
Concept	of	the	Political,
[347]
	which	was	translated
and	 published	 in	 the	 journal	Questions	 of
Sociology	 by	 Alexander	 Filippov.)	 But	 the
momentum	generated	here	by	Schmitt’s	ideas	was

Eurasian	 and	 conservative	 revolutionary.	 The
Eurasian	 international	 movement	 also	 took	 the
trouble	 to	 translate	 and	 promote	 the	 works	 of
other	 brilliant	 German	 thinkers.	 This,	 however,
does	not	matter.
What	matters	is	something	else.	Who	is	Carl
Schmitt?	 He	 is	 a	 representative	 of	 realism	 in
international	 relations	 and	 one	 of	 the	 most
important,	world-class	political	scientists.	He	is
fashionable	in	the	West	today.	There	is	a	huge
interest	in	him	on	both	the	Right	and	the	Left.
Carl	Schmitt	is	precisely	the	key	to	what	Putin
is	doing	in	politics	today	and	is	going	to	do	in	the
future.	 Schmitt	 is	 a	 realist	 in	 both	 foreign	 and
domestic	 policy.	 Schmitt,	 together	 with	 Eric
Voegelin	 (a	 political	 scientist	 from	 the	 same
group	 of	 Catholic	 thinkers	 as	 Schmitt),
[348]
substantiated	 the	 neo-Hobbesian	 approach	 as	 a
certain	political	approach	within	the	framework
of	 political	 theology.
[349]
	 These	 two	 political

scientists	 never	 discussed	 parties,	 ideologies,
parliamentarianism	   or	   authoritarianism,
totalitarianism	or	liberal	democracy,	but	they	said
that	the	most	important	function	of	the	state	is	to
maintain	 order	 and	 that	 the	 state	 should	 be
completely	free	in	a	political	sense	of	ideological
convictions.
There,	perhaps,	is	the	key	to	the	madness	of
our	 political	 system.	 The	 state	 is	 managed	 by
some	 stringent	 and	 obvious	 principles.	 For
example,	 people	 should	 not	 kill	 each	 other,
commit	 acts	 of	 terrorism,	 destabilise	 the	 state,
give	away	the	state’s	oil	for	free,	be	guided	solely
by	 mercantilist	 economic	 models,	 and	 so	 on.
Putin	 has	 projected	 realism	 in	 international
relations	onto	domestic	politics	and	thus	reshaped
the	 concept	 of	 our	 state	 and	 society.	Yes,	 this
means	that	Putin	has	forcibly	applied	realism	to
domestic	politics.	Putin	is	indifferent	to	debates
in	the	Parliament.	He	is	not	interested	in	whether

deputies	are	acting	according	to	their	beliefs.	He
is	 indifferent	 to	 everything	 that	 is	 related	 to
political	interests,	and	maybe	to	 all	 politicians.
The	important	thing	for	politicians	is	to	not	make
a	 mess	 of	 things,	 not	 to	 sell	 children	 for	 their
organs,	 not	 to	 give	 Russian	 oil	 companies	 to
foreign	owners,	and	for	the	people	to	not	take	to
the	 streets	 and	 create	 mass	 disorder.	You	 have
every	right	to	do	as	you	will,	as	long	as	it	does	not
interfere	with	the	state’s	abilities	to	perform	its
basic	functions.	Once	you	start	to	interfere,	you
will	be	given	a	time-out.	In	a	sense,	this	kind	of
realism	 is	 liberal,	 leaving	 the	 policy	 to	 our
discretion.	You	can	say	whatever	you	want,	but	do
not	interfere	with	the	roadway	where	people	are
going	 to	 work	 and	 driving	 the	 snowploughs.
Snowploughs	 are	 more	 important	 than	 all
parliamentary	 politics	 because	 they	 clear	 the
snow.	That	is	realism.	A	snowplough	drives	along
and	clears	snow.	Suddenly,	it	reaches	Bolotnaya

and	 it	 is	 bothered	 by	 the	 snow.	 Then	 it	 clears
Bolotnaya.	 It	 is	 nothing	 personal.	 Sometimes
representatives	 of	 all	 groups	 want	 to	 stop	 the
clearing	of	snow.	Those	on	the	Right,	Left,	the
liberals,	 and	 the	 Communists	 can	 sometimes
actually	gather	together	and	do	it.	Putin	looks	at
them	 and	 asks,	 ‘What	 are	 these	 people	 doing
here?	In	principle,	I	do	not	mind	at	all	that	they
are,	but	why	do	they	interfere	with	clearing	the
snow?’	And	then	the	President	loses	his	patience
and	removes	the	people	along	with	the	snow.	My
hypothesis	 is	 that	 there	 is	 none	 of	 the
authoritarianism	 or	 totalitarianism	 of	 which
people	 usually	 accuse	 Putin.	 In	 fact,	 there	 is
nothing	even	conservative.
Simple	 realism	 perceives	 the	 state	 and	 the
institution	 of	 order,	 both	 politically	 and
ideologically,	to	be	free	of	convictions.	The	state
remains	indifferent	to	the	content	of	political	and
ideological	life,	although	this	indifference	exists

within	 a	 certain	 framework,	 that	 is,	 within	 the
framework	 of	 a	 safely	 and	 satisfactorily
functioning	government.
To	the	modern	West,	the	idea	of	such	a	state
framework	 is	 a	 novel	 one	 because	 it	 is
accustomed	 to	 executing	 internal	 politics
semantically.	 The	 West	 cannot	 live	 without
semantics.	They	are	used	by	parties	on	both	the
Left	and	the	Right.	The	Right	offers	budget	cuts
while	half	of	the	Left	stands	behind	tax	cuts	and
the	other	half	supports	tax	increases.	In	Russia,
everything	 is	 the	 opposite.	 We	 have	 the	 Left
fighting	 for	 tax	 cuts,	 as	 opposed	 to	 the	 Left
around	the	world	that	supports	tax	increases,	and
we	 have	 the	 Right,	 contrary	 to	 all	 the	 rules,
insisting	 on	 a	 progressive	 tax	 structure	 and
demanding	 the	 expropriation	 of	 oligarchs...
Today	in	Russia,	the	discussion	contains	anything
but	 political	 connotations,	 and	 maybe	 this	 is
good.	Suppose	that	the	connotations	are	separate,

and	policies	have	their	own	special	functions	so
that	 the	 government	 can	 provide	 the	 necessary
services	to	the	disabled,	as	well	as	monitor	public
transport	 and	 the	 behaviour	 of	 people	 on	 the
street.	It	does	not	matter	what	kinds	of	people	are
on	the	streets	as	long	as	they	walk	along	the	side
of	the	road	where	there	are	no	snowploughs	or
other	 vehicles	 passing	 by.	 It	 is	 only	 when	 the
clear	and	precise	rules	are	broken	that	the	long
arm	of	the	law	grabs	them.	It	is	nothing	personal.
I	 think	 that	 in	 the	 last	 few	 years	 Putin	 has
demonstrated	that	not	only	have	we	entered	an	era
of	 realism,	 but	 we	 are	 deep	 inside	 the	 realist
model	of	domestic	politics.	Dmitry	Medvedev’s
term	 was	 a	 rather	 entertaining	 episode.	 Society
began	to	ponder	what	would	come	next.	Would	it
be	a	second	Medvedev	term	bringing	about	the
end	of	the	country,	realism,	and	everything	else,
including	 snow	 removal?	 But	 then	 Medvedev
returned	to	his	position	and	Putin	to	his.	Now	we

are	guaranteed	another	legitimate	eleven	years	of
Putin’s	 realism	 and	 more,	 heading	 towards
infinity.	 How	 long	 can	 this	 last?	 I	 think	 that
everything	in	Russia	is	unpredictable	until	the	last
moment.	 Once	 we	 think	 that	 we	 understand
something,	 it	 most	 likely	 means	 that	 we	 are
mistaken,	since	we	live	in	a	world	of	historical
dreams.	This,	perhaps,	is	the	special	charm	of	our
national	history.
I	think	that	by	fixating	on	Putin’s	realism	in
foreign	 and	 domestic	 policy,	 I	 am	 groping	 for
some	important	reference	points	toward	a	rational
explanation	 of	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 Russia.	 I
think	that	any	other	way	of	looking	at	him	would
be	less	accurate	and	more	absurd.
Putin’s	realism	is	frustrating	and	fascinating.
It	is	frustrating	because	he	no	longer	meets	the
needs	 of	 our	 time,	 and	 fails	 in	 addressing	 the
critical	and	meaningful	moments	of	our	history
and	 our	 existence.	 It	 is	 fascinating	 because

conservatism,	 which	 is	 exposed	 in	 Putin’s
realism,	is	always	fascinating	and	charming.	But
it	 is	 not	 enough.	 It	 always	 seems	 to	 us	 that	 it
creates	  and	  conceptualises	  predominantly
technical,	 short-term	 projects.	 Generally,	 in	 all
fairness,	 it	 should	 be	 noted	 that	 a	 pragmatic
approach	in	the	spirit	of	Putin’s	realist	theory	of
international	 relations	 has	 no	 systematic
framework,	or	it	simply	remains	unarticulated.
Putin’s	 managerial	 elite	 have	 no	 rational
models	for	calculating	national	interests	and	no
concise	and	interconnected	understanding	of	the
functioning	of	geopolitical	forces	in	the	world	in
mind.	 Everyone	 in	 the	 field	 of	 upholding	 the
public	interest	is	guided	by	their	individual	views
or	 by	 decrees	 from	 above	 in	 which	 logic	 is
sometimes	  completely	  absent.	  Realism
presupposes	a	calculation.	Here	Putin	relies	on	his
ingenuity	and	resourcefulness,	his	own	and	that	of
his	inner	circle.	That	is,	there	is	not	only	no	idea

of	 a	 mission,	 there	 is	 also	 no	 systematic	 or
systemic	 rationalisation	 in	 line	 with	 national
interests.	Here	are	the	intuitionism	and	adaptive
agility,	 entirely	 Russian	 traits,	 which	 help
compensate	for	the	lack	of	a	systematic	approach.
But	only	for	the	time	being,	and	this	has	nothing
to	do	with	the	National	Idea.

7.	Criticism	of	Putin
from	Above
A	‘Reigning	Idea’	Is	Insufficient
Today	we	are	left	with	just	one	method:	criticism
of	Putin	from	above.	Criticism	of	his	realism,	his
pragmatism,	and	the	insignificance	and	formality
of	his	actions.	This	criticism	doesn’t	come	from
the	 right,	 or	 the	 left,	 or	 below.	 How	 can	 we
comprehend	this?	Why	from	above?	As	both	the
formal	 and	 informal	 pinnacle	 of	 the	 power
pyramid,	how	could	anything	exist	above	Putin?
Inherent	in	the	very	notion	of	sovereignty	is	that
above	him	stands	no	other	institution	of	authority.
That	is	the	point.	So	what	exists	above	Putin,	if
everything	 (in	 Russia)	 exists	 below	 or	 beside
him?
The	 idea	 stands	 above.	 Putin	 himself,	 most

likely,	 doesn’t	 believe	 in	 the	 idea,	 but	 in	 the
means	 and	 methods.	 That’s	 his	 business.
Sometimes	even	philosophers	don’t	believe	in	the
idea,	let	alone	rulers.	But	ideas	exist,	and	they	stir
the	 world,	 history,	 society,	 and	 humanity.	 If
someone	doesn’t	want	to	confront	these	ideas,	if
he	avoids	the	intensive	and	trepidatious	process
of	reasoning,	then	other	people	will	think	for	him
—	 others	 that	 don’t	 distance	 themselves	 from
reflection.	 Even	 American	 neoconservatives
recognise	that	ideas	have	meaning.	In	this	case,
they’re	right.	And	so,	there	you	have	it:	criticism
of	Putin	from	above	means	to	offer	criticism	of
his	actions	and	strategies	from	the	point	of	view
of	an	idea.
We	 immediately	 need	 to	 determine:	 what
idea?	 Ideas	 look	 different	 —	 there	 are	 liberal,
globalist,	 Western,	 Marxist,	 and	 socialist	 ideas.
We	leave	their	adherents	to	their	particular	way
of	looking	at	things.	For	us,	the	reigning	idea	is

the	 Russian	 Idea,	 the	 idea	 of	 Great	 Russia,
emerging	from	centuries	of	history	and	careening
towards	full	and	bright	fulfilment	in	the	future.
This	idea	has	many	different	aspects	—	cultural,
geopolitical,	  social,	  political,	  religious,
psychological,	   ethical,	   anthropological,
ethnological,	in	terms	of	values,	and	so	on.	But
given	this	variety	and	inexhaustible	abundance	of
meanings	 and	 aspects,	 the	 Russian	 Idea	 offers
itself	as	something	full,	whole,	and	organic.	And
this	whole	idea	—	though	approximate,	intuitive,
remote,	and	vague	—	is	sensed	and	understood	by
every	Russian	person.	To	be	Russian	is	to	be	a
compatriot	in	the	Russian	Idea,	in	any	manner	—
even	 in	 the	 most	 unexpected,	 paradoxical,
dialectic,	convoluted	of	ways.
How	does	Putin	relate	to	the	Russian	Idea?	He
is	somehow	connected	to	it,	in	one	way	or	another
considers	 it,	 and	 associates	 with	 it.	 He	 is
connected	 to	 it	 through	 his	 realism.	 Putin	 is

uninterested	 in	 Russia	 as	 a	 government.	 Putin
sees	 government	 as	 a	 value.	 Freedom,
independence,	 and	 government	 sovereignty
constitute	 its	 ideological	 foundation.	 Putin
considers	and	pays	attention	to	these	questions.
Putin’s	actions	during	his	first	presidential	term
explicitly	 prove	 this:	 he	 didn’t	 waver	 for	 one
minute	about	whether	or	not	Russia	needed	the
Caucasus,	he	won	the	Second	Chechen	War,	he
stopped	regional	opposition,	he	held	on	to	South
Ossetia,	he	abolished	(in	the	end)	elections	for	the
regional	heads	of	the	Federation	and,	accordingly,
in	 the	 national	 republics,	 removed	 from	 the
constitutions	 of	 these	 regions	 any	 mention	 of
sovereignty,	 and	 much	 else	 in	 the	 same	 spirit.
Therefore	he	conducts	tests	of	the	Russian	Idea
and,	in	short,	comes	out	on	its	side.	In	this	sense,
he	 is	 the	 only	 political	 figure	 in	 contemporary
Russia	 endowed	 with	 a	 substantial	 amount	 of
trust;	in	this	sense,	he	is	a	Russian	in	the	Kremlin

(and,	 furthermore,	 certainly	 not	 German,	 as
Alexander	Rahr
[350]
	called	him).
Following	the	first	test,	we	come	to	the	next
layer	 of	 the	 Russian	 Idea.	 As	 far	 as	 form	 is
concerned	 —	 independence,	 freedom,	 integrity,
and	sovereignty	—	Putin	is	doing	fine.	But	let’s
move	on	to	content.	This	is	where	we	start	to	see
problems.	  The	  liberal	  attitude	  towards
government,	inherent	in	today’s	world,	generally
prohibits	 itself	 from	 containing	 any	 level	 of
substance.	 It’s	 simply	 a	 ‘night	 watchman’,	 a
‘lesser	 of	 evils,	 and	 a	 product	 of	 the	 ‘social
contract’	put	into	effect	so	that	‘people	don’t	kill
each	other’	(Hobbes	and	his	Leviathan).	Simply
put,	 the	 modern	 era	 has	 restricted	 the	 formal
aspects	of	and	refuses	to	talk	about	the	meaning
and	purpose	of	government	or	about	its	mission.
Is	 it	 compatible	 with	 the	 Russian	 Idea?
Absolutely	not.	Russians,	for	the	entirety	of	their
history,	 have	 understood	 government	 to	 be	 a

sacrosanct	 value,	 as	 a	 repository	 for	 spiritual
meaning.	 For	 centuries	 it	 was	 the	 realm	 of
Russian	 Orthodox	 ideals,	 and	 in	 the	 twentieth
century	it	was	the	global	Communism	idea.	But	in
all	circumstances,	Russia	has	always	conceived	of
itself	 as	 a	 government	 endowed	 with	 higher
meaning	and	purpose.	It	has	a	specific	Russian
purpose,	 which	 sets	 it	 apart	 from	 other,
neighbouring	governments.
What	 do	 we	 see	 in	 Putin’s	 case?	Are	 there
signs	 of	 resonance	 with	 this	 sacral	 aspect	 of
Russian	 statehood?	 It	 doesn’t	 seem	 so.	 Putin’s
conception	 of	 government	 is	 completely
European,	and	wholly	conforms	to	the	principles
of	a	nation-state.	As	far	as	we’ve	seen,	only	the
formal	aspects	of	government	hold	meaning	for
Putin;	he	attributes	no	significance	to	the	other
aspects.	 For	 him,	 government	 is	 a	 technical
construct.	The	primary,	formal	characteristic	of	a
government	is	its	sovereignty.	Putin	is	ready	to

defend	 it,	 but	 the	 idea	 that	 Russia	 should	 have
some	sort	of	mission	or	purpose	aside	from	its
technical	 effectiveness,	 adequate	 management,
and	 adept	 manoeuvring	 amidst	 the	 threatening
elements	  of	  international	  relations	  and
geopolitical	 challenges,	 has	 not	 yet	 taken	 root.
His	public	appearances,	efforts	in	the	spheres	of
politics	and	ideology,	and	actions	on	the	world
stage	testify	to	this.	Throughout,	we	see	just	one
aspect	—	technique,	pragmatism,	and	practicality.
That	is	absolutely	not	Russian,	it	is	European.
Hegemony	and	Counter-Hegemony:
A	Battle	of	Minds
The	Politics	of	Big	Ideas
Today,	Putin	and	his	circle	understand	that	Russia
needs	 big	 ideas	 and	 big	 projects.	 The	 Eurasian
Economic	 Union	 and	 Eurasian	 integration	 is	 a
large	and	very	serious	project.	The	project	is	a	bit

of	a	paradox	because	we	oppose	‘Eurasianism’	in
Europe	 and	 Asia.	 We	 maintain	 that	 Eurasia	 is
neither	Europe	or	Asia,	but	simultaneously	both
Europe	and	Asia.	A	key	component	of	this	project
is	 the	 desire	 to	 substantiate	 the	 uniqueness	 of
Russian	civilisation.	When	Putin	talks	about	the
Eurasian	empire	from	Lisbon	to	Vladivostok,	this
is	 no	 accident.	 The	 discussion	 focuses	 on	 a
particular	 reorganisation	 of	 the	 international
landscape	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 multi-polar	 world,
which	 will	 not	 be	 oppressed	 by	 the	 West’s
universal	 values.	 Today	 even	 the	 West	 itself
understands	that	it	does	not	impel	globalisation
and	 is	 not	 capable	 of	 assimilating	 all	 of	 the
world’s	cultures	and	civilisations,	with	its	billions
of	people,	and	its	populations	that	identify	with
different	values.
Even	 Europe	 is	 collapsing,	 as	 we	 see	 with
Greece	and	Cyprus.	It’s	obvious	that	the	West’s
universal	 global	 project	 has	 failed.	 From	 this

situation	 arises	 a	 critical	 question:	 can	 we
Russians	use	this	window	of	 opportunity,	 when
the	 West’s	 unipolar	 front	 has	 stalled?	 Putin,
completely	 logically,	 offers	 a	 single	 solution:
Eurasian	integration,	that	is,	the	creation	of	a	new
civilisation,	 the	 purpose	 of	 which	 would	 be	 to
strategically	adapt	the	landscape	to	a	new	model,
which	includes	a	new	pole	in	a	multipolar	world.
Putin	does	this	skilfully	and	pragmatically,	using
the	available	resources.	Maybe	everything	will	go
smoothly.	I	am	not	certain	of	the	idea’s	future
success	or	failure	as	I	—	the	author	of	the	concept
of	 the	 Eurasian	 Economic	 Union	 and	 Eurasian
integration	 —	 as	 an	 author	 and	 as	 a	 political
scientist,	 philosopher,	 and	 metaphysician,	 I	 see
that	Putin	lacks	historical	temperament	and	scale
in	the	execution	of	this	project.	A	historical	act	is
an	anomaly	with	a	plus	sign.	It	is	not	the	act	of
normal	 people,	 but	 of	 great,	 prominent,	 and
serious	 historical	 figures.	 The	 unification	 of

Eurasia,	created	here	on	our	mainland,	and	that	of
a	 specific	 new	 civilisation’s	 landscape,	 and	 the
creation	of	a	multi-polar	world	—	all	of	this	is	an
undertaking	 for	 great	 people.	 Putin	 is	 currently
battling	 fundamental	 domestic	 problems	 and	 is
occupied	 with	 pragmatic	 complications.	 He	 has
normalised	the	situation	in	the	country	and	has
proven	 that	 he	 is	 capable	 of	 handling	 the
situation,	but	thus	arises	an	important	question:	is
he	really	capable	of	standing	toe-to-toe	with	the
demands	 of	 history?	 He	 proposed	 the	 Eurasian
Economic	 Union,	 but	 does	 he	 truly	 understand
what	 it	 will	 require?	 Does	 he	 realise	 the
difficulties	he	will	soon	face	and	the	substantial
efforts	 that	 are	 essential	 for	 the	 project’s
realisation?	Does	he	recognise	that	the	strength	to
do	it	that	must	come	from	Russia	and	our	foreign
and	domestic	policy?
Political	Realism:	The	Politics	of	Body	and

the	Politics	of	Soul
What	 is	 political	 realism	 in	 the	 twenty-first
century?	To	what	degree	do	desires,	dreams,	and
ideals	 have	 a	 place	 in	 realistic	 policy?	 In	 any
political	arena,	clear	goals	are	always	desirable.
Will	 is	 a	 fundamental	 component	 of	 human
society,	what	with	people	as	they	are.	Man	is	a
being,	endowed	with	a	will	that	strives	to	make
something	 that	 isn’t	 there;	 to	 create	 something
that	doesn’t	yet	exist.	In	philosophy,	this	is	called
the	principle	of	‘impossibilia’	—	the	achievement
of	 that	 which	 is	 unbelievable,	 impossible,	 or
utopian.	 This	 is	 what	 drives	 man	 to	 leave	 his
mark	on	history.	Will	transforms	a	dream	into	a
project,	into	a	programme,	into	a	plan	of	action
—	and,	in	the	end,	into	reality.	The	creation	of
our	 international	 policy	 guidelines	 has	 required
indisputable	effort	from	the	government,	from	the
people,	from	politicians,	and	from	scholars.	But
the	battle	between	the	enthusiasts	and	the	sceptics

will	be	decided	by	just	one	factor:	the	presence	of
will.	What	we	hunger	to	do,	we	will	do.
When	we	talk	about	the	Eurasian	Union,	we
exclude	the	furthest	extent	of	our	dream	—	the
dream	 of	 the	 poet	 and	 diplomat	 Fyodor
Tyutchev
[351]
	 —	 a	 universal	 Orthodox	 empire.
Today,	 this	 seems	 unrealistic	 to	 us.	 But	 the
realisation	of	the	Eurasian	Union,	both	short-term
and	long-term,	is	a	practical	and	wholly	feasible
task.	It	is	why	we	are	willing	to	consider	that	the
design	of	Russia’s	foreign	policy	in	the	twenty-
first	century	should	be	political	realism:	it	allows
room	  for	  imagination,	  accomplishment,
fulfilment,	 and	 passion,	 but	 is	 compatible	 with
existing	 realities,	 sensibly	 assesses	 possibilities
and	resources,	and	does	not	create	challenges	it	is
incapable	of	overcoming.
Putin’s	actions	regarding	the	Eurasian	Union
these	days,	during	his	third	term,	are	absolutely
correct.	 And	 difficult.	 I	 don’t	 exclude	 the

possibility	that	he	is	acting	in	spite	of	himself.	He
would	 have	 gladly	 focused	 only	 on	 Russia	 —
which	comes	easily	to	him	—	and	on	not	allowing
the	 country	 to	 fall	 to	 pieces,	 exchanging	 one
corrupt	bureaucrat	for	another	from	time	to	time.
Putin	 does	 everything	 so	 slowly	 and
incrementally	that	it	is	clear	we	will	never	make
it	to	our	critical	point	in	history.	But	if	we	don’t
actively	 take	 part	 in	 history	 now,	 and	 instead
simply	follow	the	flow	of	inertia,	at	some	point
the	situation	will	become	critical.	The	world	is
entering	 a	 new	 chapter,	 with	 new	 challenges
arising.	Does	Russia	truly	have	a	grand	design	—
for	itself,	for	Europe,	for	the	East,	for	America,
for	its	neighbours?
The	EurAsEC	is	great,	and	every	step	in	that
direction,	however	small,	is	a	historical	success.
But	 at	 the	 moment	 Putin	 is	 proposing	 the
EurAsEC	 as	 an	 integration	 of	 elements	 on	 a
purely	material	level.	The	first	step	of	the	project

was	 the	 Union	 State	 of	 Russia,	 Belarus,	 and
Kazakhstan.	The	Customs	Union	is	a	considerable
proposal.	 For	 example,	 in	 nineteenth-century
Germany	 between	 1815	 and	 1848,	 a	 similar
proposal	by	Friedrich	von	List	led	to	the	creation
of	 a	 completely	 new	 economic	 and	 political
situation	in	Europe.
[352]
In	 my	 opinion,	 even	 Putin’s	 approach	 to
problems	 is	 purely	 corporeal,	 much	 like
Epicurus.
[353]
	 He	 sees	 the	 population	 as	 an
aggregate	of	material	objects	that	one	must	feed,
give	the	ability	to	move	about,	keep	from	falling
off	the	roof,	give	the	ability	to	buy	a	tram	ticket
so	that	they	can	travel	somewhere,	put	up	signs	so
they	don’t	need	to	cross	the	street	without	a	walk
signal,	and	ensure	that	they	don’t	yell,	don’t	do
anything	stupid,	and	are	well-behaved.	This	is	all
materialism.	 Putin	 suggests	 uniting	 the	 post-
Soviet	 landscape	 in	 the	 same	 way	 —	 on	 a
materialistic	 basis.	 For	 example,	 if	 Ukraine

doesn’t	want	to	do	something,	you	can	tighten	or
loosen	the	gas	line.	Without	gas,	it’s	cold	—	one
starts	to	shiver	and	makes	a	concession.	Furnace
diplomacy.
Putin’s	 current	 platform	 is	 about	 integrating
concrete	 things:	 the	 Customs	 Union,	 the
economy,	the	EurAsEC.		Turn	on,	turn	off,	press,
release,	give,	take.	That	is,	all	actions	are	on	the
level	of	concrete,	material	realities.	I	think	that
it’s	necessary	to	move	on	to	the	politics	of	spirit.
If	a	person	is	comprised	not	only	of	a	body,
but	 has	 a	 spirit,	 then	 there	 should	 also	 be	 a
political	 spirit	 and	 a	 politics	 of	 a	 universal
history,	of	historical	ideas,	and	of	fate.	A	notion
of	the	identity	of	the	post-Soviet	landscape	should
exist,	a	Russian	identity...
A	spiritual	Eurasia	should	appear.	A	Eurasian
spirit.	 Right	 now	 Putin	 is	 concerned	 with	 the
material	Eurasia,	the	material	Customs	Union,	the
material	integration,	and	the	material	rebirth	of

Russia.	 A	 physical	 Russia	 is	 being	 reborn.	 Or
rather,	Russia	is	not	being	‘reborn’	so	much	as	it
is	returning	to	its	natural	state	of	being.
Further,	it	is	essential	to	have	a	political	spirit.
But	to	engage	in	the	spiritual,	it	is	essential	to	pay
attention	to	how	one	cultivates	a	spirit.	A	spirit	is
a	 very	 delicate	 matter,	 more	 delicately
constructed	than	a	body.	I	surmise	that	to	do	that
it	is	necessary	to	have	a	notion	of	the	logic	of
world	history	and	about	why	our	country	moves
into	certain	territories,	but	not	others;	what	drove
Russian	 history;	 and	 who	 Russians,	 Ukrainians,
Cossacks,	 Tajiks,	 Iranians,	 Europeans,	 Chinese,
and	 Indians	 are.	 It	 is	 essential	 to	 have	 a
fundamental	  understanding	  of	  the	  most
significant	pieces	of	history	so	as	to	unite	some
nations	and	confront	others.	You’re	not	going	to
be	nice	to	everyone.	It	is	impossible	to	undertake
that	kind	of	historical	project	in	such	a	manner
that	all	nations	of	the	world	are	satisfied.

At	 first	 glance,	 it	 seems	 that	 America	 is
motivated	 only	 by	 material	 concerns,	 and	 is
implementing	the	physical	transformation	of	the
world,	but	that’s	just	an	appearance.	The	basis	of
American	unipolarity	lies	specifically	in	the	idea
of	 Manifest	 Destiny.
[354]
	 It	 is	 the	 result	 of	 a
particular	  ideological	  and	  philosophical
programme.	A	facet	of	Russian	culture	has	always
been	 its	 rejection	 of	 Western	 materialistic
dominance.	What	is	of	principal	importance	for
us	 is	 the	 discovery	 of	 an	 intellectual,	 spiritual,
and	 philosophical	 agenda	 for	 Russia,	 the
exploration	 of	 our	 own	 national	 fate,	 and	 the
composition	 of	 our	 identity	 across	 centuries	 of
history.	 The	 fact	 is	 that	 throughout	 history	 we
didn’t	 simply	 become	 materially	 stronger,
conquer	someone,	colonise,	develop,	expand	and
entrench.	 We	 did	 those	 things	 as	 part	 of	 a
definitive,	historical	mission	of	Russia.	If	we	do
not	recognise	and	reconstruct	that	mission	now,

then	it	seems	that	any	actions	we	take	on	the	level
of	sheer	materialism,	even	if	they	are	successful,
will	 amount	 to	 nothing	 more	 than	 pirate’s
plunder.
Globalisation	and	Hegemony
A	great	number	of	challenges	stand	before	Russia,
challenges	unlike	any	she	has	seen	in	the	last	two
decades.	 These	 challenges	 are	 not	 technical	 or
technological,	but	ideological	and	philosophical.
The	 theory	 of	 de-ideologisation,	 which	 was
popular	in	the	USSR	during	the	‘70s,	turned	out	to
be	false.	Ideologies	don’t	simply	vanish	—	they
transform,	camouflage	their	original	appearance,
and	 inculcate	 themselves	 through	 subtle
techniques	and	by	influencing	the	order	of	things.
Today’s	process	of	globalisation	is	an	aggressive
imposition	 of	 Western	 liberal	 ideology	 and
American	 values	 on	 a	 global	 scale.	 Under	 this
ideology,	the	qualification	has	changed.	Having

conquered	 all	 other	 prevailing	 ideologies,
liberalism	as	an	ideology	of	the	postmodern	era
moves	from	the	subjective	sphere	to	the	objective
sphere,	 becoming	 an	 existential	 fact	 and	 is
transformed	into	the	‘objective’	order	of	things.
Liberalism	 in	 the	 postmodern	 era	 virtualises
reality,	 fuses	 with	 it,	 ceases	 to	 be	 a	 political
theory	 and	 becomes	 a	 singular	 post-political
practice.	Spurred	by	the	‘end	of	history’,	politics
is	replaced	by	economics	(the	market	economy),
and	 governments	 and	 nations	 take	 part	 in	 the
melting	pot	of	universal	globalisation.	The	values
of	 liberalism	 are	 said	 to	 be	 ‘universal’	 and
‘common	 to	 humanity’,	 even	 though	 they	 are
solely	 derived	 from	 the	 experiences	 of	 the
European	 and	American	 segments	 of	 humanity,
people	who	live	in	a	limited	territory.
This	 kind	 of	 globalisation	 today	 is	 unipolar
and	puts	the	reins	of	world	sovereignty	into	the
hands	of	the	US,	which	pretends	not	only	to	have

control	over	global	processes,	but	also	over	the
establishment	 of	 the	 rules	 of	 the	 game
(hegemony).
Along	with	the	imposition	of	American	values
(the	 market,	 individualism,	 personal	 rights,
liberal	 democracy,	 bourgeois	 parliamentarism,
economic	control	concentrated	in	the	hands	of	a
few	large-scale	world	monopolies,	transnational
corporations,	 etc.)	 comes	 the	 imposition	 of	 all
other	 American	 interests.	 Those	 countries	 and
governments	that	follow	the	US	in	their	regional
politics	are	labelled	as	‘democracies’	(even	if	no
such	rule	has	ever	existed	in	said	country),	and
those	that	dare	to	proclaim	their	sovereignty	are
regarded	as	‘outlaws’	or	‘authoritarian	regimes’
or	are	accused	of	‘living	in	the	past’	(more	often
than	not,	without	people	like	that	there	wouldn’t
be	 a	 foundation	 for	 anything).	 Globalisation
transforms	countries	and	people	from	sovereign
subjects	of	international	politics	into	instruments,

over	whom	sovereignty	is	gradually	passed	from
the	hands	of	national	governors	to	a	supranational
authority	—	to	the	embryo	of	a	kind	of	‘world
power’.
Gramsciism	and	Neo-Gramscianism	in
Politics
The	 modern	 world	 presents	 a	 variety	 of
challenges	to	Russia,	ones	that	are	impossible	to
respond	 to	 using	 Putin’s	 strategy	 of	 realism	 in
politics	and	international	relations.	The	thing	is,
Putin’s	 realism	 relies	 on	 a	 strategy	 of	 material
strength,	 technology,	 and	 power	 —	 what	 is
referred	 to	 as	 ‘hardware’.	 In	 the	 contemporary
world,	 the	 primary	 battle	 is	 waged	 using	 the
intellectual	  strategy	  of	  ‘software’.	  The
conversation	 focuses	 on	 concepts	 of	 hegemony
and	counter-hegemony.
The	contemporary	West	has	just	barely	won	on
this	 level,	 and	 only	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 its

intellectual	discourse	and	its	global	cognitive	and
cultural	strategy,	which	has	become	predominant
in	 the	 world,	 is	 actively	 influencing	 not	 just
individuals	but	also	the	collective,	the	classes,	the
parties,	and	the	economic	and	political	structure
throughout	the	world.	The	Western	centres	that
manage	global	development	understand	very	well
that	 the	 contemporary	 hegemonic	 discourse	 is
Western-centric	 and	 based	 on	 liberalism,	 being
indefinitely	replicated	and	ingrained	in	the	depths
of	the	social	and	intellectual	landscape	and	thus
penetrating	the	depths	of	everyday	consciousness
and	the	‘structure	of	things’	throughout	the	world,
works	better	than	economic	and	social	revolution.
This	 approach	 softly	 brings	 about	 change	 in
political	and	economic	organisations	and	extends
to	a	transformation	in	the	lifestyles	and	thinking
of	 all	 social	 strata	 and	 classes,	 countries,
governments,	and	continents.	Ideas	are	what	rule
the	world,	and	today	nowhere	more	effectively	so

than	in	economics	and	finance.	Underestimating	
ideas,	 ideology,	 worldview,	 ideals,	 and	 ideal
factors	in	history	is	one	of	Putin’s	mistakes	that
could	prove	fatal.
The	understanding	of	hegemony	in	the	broad
discourse	of	political	science	was	introduced	by
the	 Italian	 neo-Marxist	 Antonio	 Gramsci.	 The
word	‘hegemony’	originally	meant	‘domination’.
Marxism	 cultivated	 an	 understanding	 of
economic	 domination,	 determined	 by	 the
ownership	of	the	means	of	production.	According
to	Marx,	this	is	economic	dominion	in	the	basic
sense.	 Gramsci	 connects	 political	 domination
with	 Leninism	 and	 sees	 it	 as	 a	 degree	 of
autonomy	of	the	superstructure	in	politics,	in	a
situation	 where	 the	 political	 will	 of	 a	 certain
(proletariat)	force	is	able	to	change	(activating	a
certain	 segment	 of	 superstructure)	 a	 political
situation,	even	if	the	basis	for	that	change	is	not
completely	ready.

In	the	contemporary	world,	domination	holds
special	meaning	in	the	sphere	of	superstructure
that	Gramsci	correlates	with	‘civil	society,’	with
a	focus	on	intellectual	figures.	Gramsci	believes
that	 hegemony	 is	 the	 domination	 of	 forces	 of
inequality	and	supremacy,	not	in	the	spheres	of
economics	and	politics	but	in	the	cultural	sphere,
in	the	communities	of	intellectuals	and	experts,
art	 and	 science,	 philosophy	 and	 the	 everyday
awareness	 of	 the	 masses.	 This	 third	 sector	 of
superstructure,	 which	 exists	 independently	 of
politics	 or	 political	 organisations	 (government,
parties,	 etc.),	 enjoys	 the	 same	 level	 of	 relative
autonomy	as	Leninism	did	in	politics.	Revolution,
in	 this	 instance,	 from	 the	 point	 of	 view	 of
Gramsci,	 has	 three	 aspects:	 in	 the	 economic
sphere	 (by	 the	 classic	 Marxist	 laws),	 in	 the
political	 sphere	 (Lenin’s	 strategy),	 and	 in	 the
sphere	of	civil	society	which	presents	itself	as	the
sphere	 of	 freedom.	 In	 the	 last	 sphere,	 an

intellectual	 can	 make	 his	 choice	 between
conformism	 and	 non-conformism,	 between
maintaining	 the	 status	 quo,	 namely	 that	 of	 the
ruling	 bourgeois	 class	 and	 its	 ideology	 and
practices,	 or	 he	 can	 choose	 revolution,	 that	 is,
between	 hegemony	 and	 counter-hegemony.	 The
choice	that	the	intellectual	makes	does	not	depend
on	 his	 economic	 means;	 that	 is,	 it	 is	 not
determined	by	his	relationship	to	the	ownership
of	 the	 means	 of	 production	 or	 to	 his	 political
affiliation	with	a	particular	party.
Gramsci	believed	that	the	Western	world	was
created	 through	 a	 hegemony	 in	 which	 the
economy	is	dominated	by	a	capitalistic	system,
politics	 is	 dominated	 by	 a	 bourgeois	 political
force,	 and	 intellectuals	 put	 into	 practice	 the
interests	of	the	bourgeois	political	elite,	and	thus
become	capital.	It	would	appear	that	everything	is
stable:	the	worldwide	bourgeois	elite	is	pursuing
the	triumph	of	the	design	of	a	unipolar	world	and

the	creation	of	a	worldwide	government.
But	 Gramsci	 believed	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 to
mount	a	rebellion	against	this	world,	and	invited
non-conformists	and	revolutionary	intellectuals	to
create	a	‘historical	bloc’	that	is	opposed	to	this
hegemony.
Caesarism	and	Trasformismo
Why	do	the	concepts	of	hegemony	and	counter-
hegemony	 appear	 to	 be	 important	 for
contemporary	 Russia,	 Putin’s	 Russia?	 Is	 there
agreement	with	the	Neo-Gramscian	analysis,	that
all	countries	can	be	divided	into	two	categories:
countries	 where	 hegemony	 obviously	 became
stronger,	 that	 is,	 the	 development	 of	 those
capitalistic	 countries	 that	 have	 industrial
economies,	 and	 which	 are	 dominated	 by
bourgeois	 parties	 in	 parliamentary	 democratic
systems,	 and	 which	 possess	 market	 economies
and	liberal	ruling	systems;	and	countries	where,

due	 to	 different	 historical	 circumstances,	 that
didn’t	happen?	For	the	first	group	of	countries,	it
is	 considered	 acceptable	 to	 refer	 to	 them	 as
‘developed	 democracies’,	 and	 to	 refer	 to	 the
second	as	‘marginal	cases’,	‘problem	zones’,	or
even	to	put	them	in	the	category	of	‘rogue	states’
or	 ‘outlaws’.	 Gramsci	 referred	 to	 this	 second
group	 as	 ‘Caesaristic’	 (he	 obviously	 had	 the
experience	of	Fascist	Italy	in	mind).	‘Caesarism’
can	 be	 seen	 in	 a	 broader	 context,	 as	 any	 other
political	 system,	 as	 taking	 place	 where	 the
existing	 bourgeois	 relationships	 are	 fragmented
and	their	full	political	formulation	(as	in	a	classic
bourgeois-democratic	 government)	 takes	 too
long.	In	‘Caesarism,’	the	main	point	is	not	the
authoritarian	principle	of	rule,	but	specifically	a
delay	in	the	multidimensional	installation	of	the
full	values	of	a	capitalist	system	on	the	Western
model.	The	reasons	for	this	kind	of	delay	can	be
varied:	 a	 dictatorial	 style	 of	 rule,	 clannishness

among	 the	 elites,	 the	 presence	 of	 different
religious	or	ethnic	groups	in	power,	the	cultural
specificities	  of	  a	  society,	  historical
circumstances,	 the	 particular	 economic	 or
geographical	conditions	of	the	country,	and	so	on.
The	main	point	is	that	these	societies	are	not
completely	integrated	into	the	core	of	hegemony.
In	these	interim	governments,	the	political	ruling
class	 is	 still	 not	 properly	 participating	 in	 the
Western	 capitalist	 world,	 where	 capital,
hegemony,	and	bourgeois	political	parties,	which
represent	the	interests	of	the	middle	class,	control
the	agenda.
Charles	 Kupchan,	 in	 his	 book	No	 One’s
World,
[355]
	presents	a	model,	which	Gramsci	calls
‘Caesarism,’	divided	into	three	types:
1 .		the	modern	corrupt	Russian	autocracy	and
other,	 similar	 models	 in	 the	 post-Soviet
landscape	 that	 appear	 to	 be	 dominated	 by
corrupt	groups	on	the	top;

2.		the	Chinese	system	of	totalitarianism,	which
concentrates	 all	 power	 in	 a	 totalitarian
manner	on	the	governmental	level;
3 .		the	 petro-monarchies	 of	 the	 Middle	 East
where	 religious	 or	 dynastic	 aspects	 of
domination	are	included	in	the	very	political
structure,	in	its	own	Caesarism,	as	with,	for
example,	the	Saudi	sheikhs.
Let	us	stress	one	more	time	that	Russia,	according
to	 this	 classification,	 belongs	 to	 the	 group	 of
countries	with	Caesaristic	rule.
Firstly,	it	is	important	that	in	these	societies
hegemony	is	simultaneously	a	force	from	outside
(which	 stands	 on	 the	 side	 of	 a	 fully	 bourgeois
government)	and	an	internal	opposition,	which	is
otherwise	 tied	 to	 external	 factors.	 Hegemony
from	 both	 the	 outside	 and	 the	 inside	 compels
Caesarism	 to	 partially	 de-sovereignise	 and	 to
shift	to	a	more	globalist	condition	of	hegemony.

Neo-Gramscianists	 in	 international	 relations
maintain	that	‘Caesarism’	can	be	considered	‘sub-
hegemony’;	for	that	reason	its	strategy	focuses	on
balancing	the	pressures	of	hegemony	externally
and	 internally,	 making	 certain	 concessions,	 but
doing	so	selectively	in	an	effort	to	preserve	its
power	at	all	costs,	and	to	prevent	its	abdication	to
bourgeois	 political	 forces	 who	 assert	 that	 the
economic	basis	of	society	lies	within	the	political
superstructure.	‘Caesarism’	is	therefore	doomed
to	’trasformismo’
[356]
	(we	have	taken	the	Italian
term	trasformismo)	 because	 of	 its	 continuous
participation	in	hegemony,	on	the	one	hand,	and
its	constant	efforts	to	delay,	deter,	or	falsify	an
end	 towards	 which	 it	 had	 been	 steadily
progressing.	 Thus,	trasformismo	 is	 a	 balancing
process,	one	that	China	went	through	during	the
1980s	 and	 that	 Putin’s	 Russia	 is	 currently	 in,
particularly	during	the	Medvedev	era,	and	also	it
has	 also	 been	 seen	 in	 some	 Islamic	 states

recently.	 These	 governments,	 according	 to
Gramscians,	absorb	some	elements	of	the	West
—	 capitalism,	 democracy,	 the	 separation	 of
powers	 in	 political	 institutions,	 help	 to	 form	 a
middle	class,	support	the	desires	of	the	national
bourgeoisie,	and	maintain	internal	hegemony	and
international	external	hegemony,	but	do	not	do	all
of	this	thoroughly	and	not	authentically,	but	as	a
façade	in	order	to	maintain	a	political	monopoly
that	  is	  not	  strictly	  hegemonic.	  Thus,
representatives	of	critical	theory	in	international
relations	regard	Caesarism	as	something	that	will
sooner	or	later	be	overcome	by	hegemony,	as	far
as	Caesarism	is	not	more	than	a	‘historical	delay’,
and	 certainly	 does	 not	 represent	 an	 alternative,
that	 is,	 it	 is	 not	 counter-hegemony	 in	 the	 real
sense.
Specifically	  with	  this	  ‘Caesarism’,
contemporary	representatives	of	critical	theory	in
international	 relations	 refer	 to	 the	 majority	 of

countries	as	the	Third	World,	and	even	some	of
the	major	BRICS	powers	—	Brazil,	Russia,	India,
China,	and	South	Africa.
[357]
	Note	that	Russia	is
on	this	list.
Thus,	in	front	of	Russia	lies	at	least	one	path
—	the	most	likely	one,	from	the	point	of	view	of
the	 Neo-Gramscianists,	 and	 connected	 to	 an
incremental	   and	   slow	   transformation
(trasformismo)	 of	 its	 economic	 and	 political
structures,	 ideology,	 national	 lifestyle,	 culture,
and	 traditions	 in	 a	 globalist	 liberal	 scenario,
leading	 to	 the	 inclusion	 of	 the	 country	 in	 the
global	world	of	contemporary	capitalism	to	be	led
by	 a	 single	 world	 government.	 Particularly,
Russia’s	participation	in	this	new	world	order	will
only	come	at	the	cost	of	losing	Caesarism	or	its
authoritarianism	and	sovereignty,	which	until	this
time	were	at	the	centre	of	Putin’s	polities,	and	to
this	 day	 saves	 Russia	 from	 annihilation	 in	 the
world	melting	pot	of	national	governments.

The	 second,	 revolutionary	 variant	 of	 the
dynamics	 of	 Russian	 society,	 which	 is	 an
alternative	to	the	last	scenario,	is	the	development
of	 a	 Russian	 project	 of	 counter-hegemony
connected	with	the	concept	of	a	multi-polar	world
and	 a	 multitude	 of	 civilisations,	 cultures,	 and
strategic	poles	on	the	Earth,	who	help	to	preserve
the	 integrity	 of	 Russian	 civilisation.	 This
demands	the	development	of	a	unique	Russian-
Eurasian	answer	to	the	call	of	the	contemporary
West,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 project	 for	 a	 multi-polar
world,	 a	 plurality	 and	 a	 dialogue	 of	 world
civilisations.
The	Historical	Pact
According	 to	 the	 theory	 of	 Neo-Gramscianism,
there	is	a	concept	of	a	‘historic	pact’	possessing
two	 multi-directional	 vectors:	 the	 side	 of
hegemony	and	the	side	of	revolution.	Hegemony,
from	Gramsci’s	point	of	view,	is	not	fate	but	a

choice.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 as	 choosing	 political
parties.	Eventually	each	person	is	free	to	choose
between	capitalism	and	Communism,	liberalism
and	socialism,	and	along	the	same	logic,	between
modernity	and	tradition.	In	the	same	way,	class,
party,	nationality,	and	gender	of	the	individual	are
secondary.	 In	 order	 to	 make	 a	 choice	 on	 the
intellectual	level	it	is	absolutely	not	necessary	to
be	disadvantaged.	Any	intellectual	may	stand	up
on	the	side	of	counter-hegemony	and	engage	in	a
revolutionary	historical	pact.	It	is	not	necessary	to
be	thrown	out	of	a	social	system	(this	is	a	main
principle	of	Gramscianism).
One	 representative	 of	 Neo-Gramscianism,
Stephen	 Gill,	 describes	 a	 historic	 pact	 as	 a
meeting	 of	 intellectual	 conformists	 who	 favour
hegemony	within	the	framework	of	the	Trilateral
Commission	or	the	Bilderberg	Club.
Chronicles	of	Global	Hegemony:

Bilderberg	and	Its	Russian	Subsidiaries
Today	the	Western	world	multiplies	the	structures
of	 hegemonic	 orientation,	 turning	 them	 into
effective	 conveyors	 for	 the	 replication	 of
bourgeois-liberal	 discourse.	 Texts,	 concepts,
programmes	 and	 recommendations,	 planned
coups,	 colour	 revolutions,	 and	 the	 unconscious
behaviour	of	crowds,	all	show	the	giant	reservoir
of	 strategies	 used	 by	 liberal	 hegemony.	 The
Bilderberg	Club	plays	an	important	role	in	Putin’s
Russia.
The	first	meeting	of	the	Bilderberg	Club	took
place	in	1954.	The	Club	was	finally	made	official
in	1960	thanks	to	Jozéf	Retinger,
[358]
	a	dignitary	of
the	 European	 Freemasons	 whose	 theories
suggested	that	the	world	should	be	unified	under
the	 auspices	 of	 liberal-democratic	 regimes.
Conceived	 as	 a	 restricted	 area	 for	 the
coordination	 of	 the	 hegemonic	 political,
economic,	intellectual	and	media	projects	of	the

Western	 world	 transnationally,	 hey	 initially
avoided	publicity	because	it	included	most	of	the
leaders	of	the	world’s	media.
Between	1960	and	1970,	the	Club’s	activities
were	 opened	 to	 the	 public	 and	 Bilderberg	 was
seen	as	the	prototype	for	a	world	government	and
a	 supranational	 organ	 for	 capitalism.	 Shortly
thereafter,	 two	 powerful	 American	 ideologues
entered	the	club	—	the	liberal	democrat	Zbigniew
Brzezinski	 and	 the	 Republican	 realist	 Henry
Kissinger,	both	of	whom	would	serve	for	decades
as	 permanent	 members	 of	 the	 Bilderberg	 Club
and	 the	 Trilateral	 Commission,	 which	 was
established	in	1974.	One	can	also	add	the	Council
on	Foreign	Relations	(CFR)	to	this	list.
These	three	highly	efficient	and	supranational
structures	serve	as	the	vanguard	of	international
affairs	and	can	be	considered	as	the	model	for	a
world	government,	or	more	precisely,	its	shadow
cabinet.

After	the	collapse	of	the	USSR,	the	Bilderberg
Club	began	to	invite	political	figures	from	Russia.
According	 to	 Russian	 researchers,	 the	 principal
institution	of	Russia’s	integration	into	the	world
government	 was	 the	 Council	 on	 Foreign	 and
Defence	 Policy	 (CFDP)	 headed	 by	 Sergei
Karaganov.
[359]
	The	Council	and	its	members	were
practically	a	subsidiary	of	the	 Bilderberg	 Club.
Karaganov	also	served	as	an	observing	member	of
the	CFR,	an	organisation	which	is	usually	limited
to	American	politicians.	In	addition,	Karaganov
attended	almost	all	the	meetings	of	the	Trilateral
Commission	as	an	outside	observer.
Russian	 specialists	 with	 connections	 to	 the
CFDP	 were	 essentially	 ‘agents	 of	 influence’	 or
‘lobbyists’	of	the	shadow	world	government.	In
America,	lobbyists	that	advocate	for	the	rights	of
their	governments	in	the	US	Senate	or	Congress
(for	example,	the	Armenian	or	Israeli	lobby)	are
legally	 registered.	 In	 Russia	 there	 is	 no	 such

practice.	Almost	all	the	specialists	 entering	 the
CFDP	in	the	various	stages	of	its	activity	acted	as
lobbyists	 for	 world	 government.	 Of	 course,
lobbyists	and	agents	are	not	entirely	spies.	They
are	 citizens	 who	 are	 simply	 working	 in	 the
interest	of	world	government.	CFDP	documents
and	 journals	 contain	 the	 names	 of	 several
prominent	 Russian	 politicians	 over	 the	 years.
They	 contain	 not	 only	 Anatoly	 Chubais,
Gozman
[360]
	 and	 Sergei	 Karaganov,	 Grigory
Yavlinsky,	 and	 Lilia	 Shevtsova,
[361]
	 but	 also
almost	all	leading	experts	of	the	time	including
Vyacheslav	 Nikonov,	 Vitaly	 Tretyakov,
[362]
	 and
Natalya	Narochnitskaya,
[363]
	and	among	others.
Some	of	these	figures,	who	today	have	become
national	 heroes,	 were	 actively	 lobbying	 for
American	 interests	 in	 Russia	 in	 the	 1990s.	 For
example,	the	literature	includes	information	that
indicates	 that	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 1990s,

Vyacheslav	Nikonov	used	Russian	agents	to	pass
ciphers	to	the	American	leadership	by	order	of
Vadim	Bakatin,
[364]
	then	the	chairman	of	the	KGB
under	Yeltsin.
As	sad	as	it	is,	it	is	our	history	and	we	have	to
talk	 about	 it	 because	 Vladimir	 Putin	 has	 made
serious	 efforts	 to	 free	 Russia	 from	 foreign
influence.	In	order	to	do	this,	it	is	necessary	to
immediately	 revise	 the	 entire	 structure	 of	 the
CFDP,	because	every	other	member	is	a	lobbyist
for	 world	 government	 consciously	 engaged	 in
activities	on	their	behalf.
All	 hegemonic	 organisations	 including	 the
Bilderberg	Club,	the	Trilateral	Commission,	and
the	Council	on	Foreign	Relations	generally	have
the	same	function.	There	are	specialists	who	are
continuously	involved	in	all	three	organisations.
These	 include	 Henry	 Kissinger	 and	 Zbigniew
Brzezinski	as	well	as	Russian	experts	associated
with	 the	 CFDP	 and	 its	 periodical,	Russia	 in

Global	Affairs.	Virtually	all	Russian	experts	from
the	CFDP	have	worked	with	Western	institutions
associated	with	Bilderberg	or	participated	in	the
activities	of	one	or	more	of	the	structures	in	its
network,	in	one	way	or	another.	When	asked	what
role	Russia	is	given	in	the	process	of	creating	a
globalised	world,	we	can	say	that	it	was,	at	least
until	recently,	an	active	participant	in	the	process.
2013	 is	 the	 first	 year	 in	 a	 long	 time	 that	 no
Russians	were	invited	to	any	of	the	meetings.
I	have	been	following	these	globalist	clubs	for
several	 years.	 Even	 before	 the	 collapse	 of	 the
Soviet	Union,	I	wrote	articles	and	books	which,
predicted,	 to	 take	 an	 example,	 that	 if	 the
representatives	of	the	Trilateral	Commission,	in
particular	 Brzezinski	 or	 Kissinger,	 visited
Moscow,	 then	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 would	 be
destroyed	 within	 two	 or	 three	 years.	 All	 this
happened.	For	a	long	time	I	have	been	following
these	clubs’	activities	and	can	definitely	say	that

the	current	absence	of	Russians	in	these	structures
is	 telling.	 It	 means	 that	 Putin’s	 modern	 Russia
stands	strictly	behind	sovereignty.	Together	with
other	 countries	 which	 seek	 a	 multipolar	 world,
Russia	 is	 gradually	 liberating	 itself	 from	 the
control	of	these	global	networks.	It	is	escaping,
but	 is	 still	 not	 out	 entirely	 because	 such
individuals	 as	 the	 Bilderberg	 veteran	 Anatoly
Chubais	and	newcomers	such	as	Igor	Yurgens	or
Arkady	Dvorkovich	still	continue	to	pursue	this
line.
So	these	globalist	social	clubs	—	Bilderberg,
the	Trilateral	Commission,	and	the	CFR	—	not
only	discuss	political	issues	and	exchange	views
between	those	who	are	influential	upon	Western
society	  including	  politicians,	  experts,
representatives	 of	 the	 financial	 circles	 and	 the
media,	 but	 also	 on	 many	 occasions	 develop
strategies	for	world	politics.	It	is	precisely	these
clubs	 that	 are	 the	 real	 foundation	 of	 world

hegemony	by	the	modern	liberal	West	and	in	the
spirit	of	unipolar	global	hegemony	(today	the	US
performs	this	function).
In	2013	Turkey	is	on	the	Bilderberg	agenda.
What	decisions	will	be	made	at	the	meeting?	We
cannot	know	anything	about	this	process	except
that	 at	 the	 Club’s	 meetings,	 it	 will	 develop	 a
consensus	 on	 behalf	 of	 ‘global	 humanity’	 as
represented	 by	 the	 political	 elite.	 Behind	 the
scenes	 the	 Club	 is	 making	 important	 decisions
that	 affect	 every	 society.	 Do	 members	 of	 the
parliaments	in	any	country	draft	their	own	laws	or
make	their	own	decisions?	As	a	rule,	decisions
are	not	made	by	parties	or	committees.	Rather,
they	 are	 developed	 in	 the	 ‘think	 tanks’	 within
these	committees,	which	are	made	up	of	just	a
few	people.
Today	 in	 America	 and	 Russia,	 there	 are
hundreds	of	centres	servicing	the	 global	 liberal
model.	 In	 Russia	 these	 include	 the	 liberal

institutes,	funds,	organisations,	the	Higher	School
of	 Economics,	 the	 Institute	 of	 Contemporary
Development,	 and	 a	 huge	 number	 of	 liberal
experts	like	I.	Yurgens	and	Gontmakher,	and	of
course	modernisation	projects	like	Skolkovo.
Today	it	is	globalist	clubs	like	this	that	decide
how	multinational	capitalists	and	the	West	deal
with	Syria,	Turkey,	Iran,	North	Korea,	and	finally
Russia.	 This	 type	 of	 discussion	 is	 officially
impossible	in	any	country,	state,	parliament,	or
government.	In	this	case,	decisions	are	not	made
either	 in	 America	 or	 in	 Russia,	 but	 rather	 in
independent	 organisations	 which	 are	 more
versatile	than	any	one	state	can	be,	and	which	act
on	behalf	of	the	world’s	globalist	organisations.
These	globalist	clubs	do	not	have	any	legal	status
and	thus	they	are	not	required	to	disclose	their
decisions.
The	 Bilderberg	 Club’s	 decisions	 are	 non-
binding.	Nominally,	it	is	an	abstract	intellectual

project.	 Nevertheless,	 at	 some	 point	 the	 Club’s
projects	become	binding	and	uncontested.
Most	recently,	Vladislav	Surkov	conducted	an
advisory	council	meeting	at	the	Kremlin	similar
to	those	conducted	in	the	Bilderberg	Club.	As	a
rule,	the	President’s	administration	always	invites
creative	 people	 to	 its	 meetings.	 Participants	 in
these	strange	meetings	can	be	hippies,	analysts,
bankers,	  artists,	  filmmakers,	  Internet
pornographers,	   bloggers,	   and	   even
schizophrenics.	 This	 motley	 crowd	 discussed	 a
number	of	seemingly	irrelevant	topics	that	later
became	parts	of	Putin’s	agenda.
Today,	 ideas	 rule	 the	 world.	 Intellectual
decisions	in	the	non-political	superstructure	can
(in	 Gramsci’s	 understanding)	 upset	 the	 world
order,	 begin	 and	 end	 revolutions,	 remove
dictators	 and	 autocrats,	 and	 bring	 down
economies.	The	mechanisms	that	develop	a	global
liberal	strategy,	a	hegemonic	strategy,	are	finely

tuned.
Although	in	America,	Europe,	and	Russia	there
are	 completely	 different	 forms	 of	 decision-
making,	 the	 results	 are	 the	 same.	 The	 work	 of
these	 globalist	 clubs	 is	 leading	 a	 number	 of
organisations	and	states	in	different	parts	of	the
world	 to	 begin	 implementing	 synchronous	 and
coordinated	 political	 steps,	 to	 harmonise	 their
actions	 and	 to	 speak	 with	 one	 voice	 in	 world
affairs.	 This	 is	 how	 world’s	 politicians,
economists,	the	media,	the	intellectual	elite,	and
the	world’s	aristocracy	determine	the	fate	of	the
world,	its	worldview,	and	its	mindset.	All	of	this
together	 makes	 up	 the	 body	 of	 global	 liberal
hegemony.
Is	it	possible	for	Russia	to	counter	a	strategy
like	this?	Is	Russia	itself	falling	into	the	web	of
this	 mechanism,	 willingly	 or	 unwillingly,
explicitly	or	implicitly?	Has	Putin	thought	about
this	 network	 of	 intellectual	 centres,	 clubs,	 and

other	forms	of	organisations	that	once	could	have
been	 called	 counter-hegemonic?	 Indeed	 the
Izborsk	Club
[365]
	is	but	a	drop	in	the	ocean.
Worldwide	clubs	of	global	hegemony	also	had
a	hand	in	the	collapse	of	the	USSR.	In	1954	a
group	 of	 specialists	 gathered	 at	 the	 Bilderberg
Club	 to	 combat	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 and	 turn
capitalism	 into	 a	 global	 system	 besides	 which
there	would	be	no	alternative.	In	1991,	less	than
forty	 years	 later,	 this	 goal	 was	 achieved.	 This
inevitably	leads	to	the	conclusion	that	powerful
intellectual	groups	and	organisations	work	behind
the	scenes	and	represent	the	major	segments	of
global	politics,	global	intellectualism,	and	global
strategic	thinking.	Forty	years	of	intensive	work
brought	about	excellent	results.
Here	is	one	example:	one	day	during	a	private
meeting	 with	 Brzezinski,	 I	 asked	 him	 how	 the
West	 managed	 to	 persuade	 Gorbachev	 to
withdraw	Russia’s	troops	from	East	Germany.	He

smiled	and	said,	‘We	tricked	him.’
The	 structures	 of	 the	 Western	 intellectual
clubs	operate	using	extremely	delicate	strategies.
They	rely	on	strategies	of	deception,	geopolitical
lies,	 techniques	 of	 psychological	 warfare	 used
against	the	subconscious	of	the	masses,	and	on
new	memes	of	mass	liberal	culture.	They	work	as
the	 vanguard	 of	 modern	 trends	 in	 religion,
philosophy,	 and	 psychology.	 They	 also	 use	 the
images	of	global	revolutionary	practices	against
models	of	counter-hegemony.	With	these	ideas,
they	 permeate	 the	 deepest	 levels	 of	 the
subconscious	minds	not	only	of	every	man	and
woman	on	the	street,	but	also	of	the	minds	of	the
world’s	most	rational	intellectuals.	They	do	this
ultimately,	whether	through	soft	or	hard	power,	to
condition	 humanity	 towards	 the	 Global	 Liberal
Empire.
Many	 experts	 who	 have	 participated	 in	 the
meetings	 of	 the	 Trilateral	 Commission	 and	 the

Bilderberg	Club	have	expressed	their	anger	many
times	against	the	complete	illegitimacy	of	these
organisations	that	operate	according	to	a	model	of
global	 dictatorship.	 Some	 of	 these	 experts
indignantly	left	these	organisations	and	exposed
the	 illegality	 of	 their	 decisions,	 but	 then	 soon
dropped	from	the	public	eye.	They	seem	to	still
be	alive	and	working	but	their	positions	in	society
seem	 to	 have	 been	 reduced	 to	 nothing.	 These
clubs	 operate	 through	 strategies	 of	 obstruction
and	ostracism.	Roger	Garaudy
[366]
	needed	to	speak
out	in	support	of	the	Palestinian	movement	only
once	 before	 he	 disappeared	 from	 the	 list	 of
respected	 intellectuals	 in	 France	 and	 was
forgotten.	That	Abbé	Pierre,
[367]
	one	of	the	most
respected	politicians	in	France	who	fought	for	the
rights	 of	 homeless	 people	 for	 forty	 years,
supported	Garaudy	dissuaded	no	one.	We	know
how	 the	 mechanisms	 of	 demonisation	 work.
Accordingly,	 no	 sane	 person	 invited	 to	 the

Bilderberg	Club	would	ever	discuss	what	goes	on
there	because	he	knows	what	would	be	in	store	for
him	in	the	future.
Thus	operates	the	giant	hegemonic	machine	of
the	Atlantic	West.	But	at	the	same	time,	it	is	not
worth	it	to	demonise	the	situation	too	much	and
overestimate	 the	 power	 of	 and	 the	 lack	 of
alternatives	to	these	global	hegemonic	structures.
Their	secrecy	should	also	not	be	overestimated.
Secrets	are	often	revealed.	If	we	look	at	what
Western	 international	 relations	 theorists	 write
regarding	the	need	for	the	legal	establishment	of	a
world	government,	we	see	that	it	is	the	official
programme	 of	 any	 liberal	 in	 international
relations,	authorised	by	the	leaders	of	Bilderberg
who	sit	back	comfortably	and	relax	in	Europe	or
America,	knowing	their	agenda	will	be	pursued.
Any	 liberal	 in	 international	 relations	 prescribes
the	establishment	of	a	world	government	as	the
best	 and	 most	 necessary	 prospect	 and	 hope	 for

world	order.	The	idea	in	itself	is	absolutely	legal.
Therefore	 we	 should	 not	 overestimate	 the
importance	  of	  Bilderberg	  and	  similar
organisations.	These	are	just	parts	of	the	liberal
hegemonic	 idea.	 These	 ideas	 also	 include	 open
and	formal	talks	of	a	theoretical	nature	and	based
on	 the	 scientific	 theory	 of	 liberalism	 in
international	relations,	which	asserts	the	need	to
create	 a	 unipolar	 world,	 the	 establishment	 of	 a
world	 government,	 and	 the	 reduction	 of	 the
sovereignty	of	nation-states.	Each	liberal,	whether
or	 not	 he	 or	 she	 is	 a	 participant	 in	 the	 CFDP,
Surkov’s	  2020	  Forum,	  or	  some	  other
organisation,	 serves	 as	 an	 agent	 of	 this	 global
project.	It	is	nothing	personal.	The	establishment
of	a	world	government	is	as	important	to	liberal
hegemony	 as	 the	 proletarian	 revolution,
expropriation	 of	 the	 expropriators,	 and	 the
abolition	 of	 private	 property	 was	 to	 the
Communists.	If	you	are	for	Communism,	do	not

be	 surprised	 by	 the	 extermination	 of	 the
bourgeoisie,	 the	 disappearance	 of	 private
property,	 revolution,	 and	 revolutionary	 terror.
You	actively	want	and	encourage	this.	If	you	are	a
liberal,	then	do	not	be	surprised	by	the	destruction
of	nation-states,	the	reduction	of	your	country’s
sovereignty,	 and	 the	 abolition	 of	 all	 forms	 of
identity	 other	 than	 that	 of	 the	 individual.	 You
fight	and	strive	for	this,	and	because	of	this,	you
will	 be	 responsible	 if	 things	 go	 wrong	 and
situations	arise	that	are	unintended,	and	that	are
not	liberal	or	hegemonic.
The	Counter-Hegemony	and	Counter-
Society	
The	 counter-hegemonic	 conception	 is	 brought
forward	 by	 a	 specialist	 in	 the	 field	 of
international	 relations,	 Robert	 W.	 Cox,	 as	 a
generalisation	 of	 Gramsci’s	 theory	 and	 its
application	 to	 the	 current	 global	 situation.	 He

states	that	all	systems	of	international	relations
today	are	built	to	provide	service	to	the	existing
hegemony.	Everything	that	is	told	to	us	about	the
relations	between	states,	the	meaning	of	history,
and	 of	 wars	 and	 invasions	 is	 pure	 propaganda
from	the	oligarchic	elite	of	world	hegemony.	To	a
large	 extent,	 this	 construct	 rests	 on	 the
intelligentsia	or	intellectuals,	who	are	opting	for
and	serving	hegemony.
But	 intellectuals	 are	 free	 not	 to	 choose
hegemony.	As	Ernst	Niekisch	wrote,	‘There	is	no
fatalism	inherent	in	the	nature	of	human	society.
Fatalism	applies	to	the	changing	of	the	seasons
and	 to	 natural	 disasters.	 The	 dignity	 of	 man	 is
such	that	he	can	always	say	“no”.	Man	can	always
rise	up.	He	can	always	stand	up	and	fight,	even
against	 what	 seems	 inevitable,	 absolute,	 and
invincible.	 And	 even	 if	 he	 loses,	 he	 sets	 an
example	to	others.	Others	take	his	place	and	also
say	“no”.	Therefore,	the	most	fateful	and	fatal	of

events	can	be	overcome	with	strength	of	spirit.’
This	 means	 that	 in	 any	 country,	 under	 any
economic	 or	 political	 system,	 or	 in	 any
intellectual	 space,	 including	 the	 fields	 of
philosophy,	  science,	  art,	  analytics,	  and
journalism,	it	is	possible	to	find	or	develop	an
alternative	set	of	values	to	the	liberal	system	by
choosing	a	personal	or	collective	position	that	is
anti-bourgeois,	 anti-liberal,	 anti-hegemonic,	 and
responsible.	 This	 particular	 historical	 idealism
allows	us	to	consider	Western	liberal	hegemony
as	 a	 phenomenon	 that	 is	 principally	 defensive,
transformable,	rotten	from	within,	and	subject	to
deconstruction	 and	 elimination.	 It	 is	 a	 sort	 of
colossus	 with	 feet	 of	 clay	 against	 which	 joint
efforts	can	prevail.
An	Intellectual	Revolutionary	Alternative
Robert	 Cox	 poses	 a	 question	 about	 the
establishment	 of	 an	 intellectual	 revolutionary

alternative	 which	 he	 calls	 ‘counter-hegemony’.
He	 talks	 about	 the	 need	 for	 a	 global	 historical
bloc	of	intellectuals	from	around	the	world	who
opt	for	a	revolution	to	critique	the	liberal	status
quo.	The	most	important	thing	about	this	is	that	it
does	not	have	to	be	done	on	a	Marxist	basis.	Cox
thinks	that	the	historical	process	is	open,	and	in
this	 respect	 the	 domination	 of	 capital	 is	 a
construct.	In	this	respect	he	is	pointedly	different
from	the	neo-Marxists,	including	Wallerstein.
[368]
The	  post-positivist,	  constructivist,	  and
postmodernist	 ideas	 of	 Cox	 conclude	 that	 the
conditions	of	globalisation	necessitate	posing	the
question	of	counter-hegemony	as	globally	as	you
would	 pose	 the	 question	 of	 bourgeois	 liberal
hegemony.	Passive	resistance	to	global	hegemony
by	 states	 exercising	trasformismo	 is	 absolutely
insufficient	and	leads	to	the	fall	of	Caesarism.
Cox	introduces	the	concept	of	counter-society
in	contrast	to	today’s	global	society	dominated	by

bourgeois-liberal	 principles.	 How	 is	 counter-
society	 established?	 It	 is	 established	 through
contrary	principles.	All	that	is	good	in	a	global
society	must	be	destroyed,	and	in	its	place	should
be	 built	 a	 society	 with	 the	 opposite
characteristics.	Instead	of	principles	of	universal
domination,	  develop	  principles	  of	  local
community.	 Instead	 of	 the	 liberal	 monologue,
create	a	dialogue	of	organic	culture.
To	Conceive	of	Counter-Hegemony
John	 M	 Hobson	 is	 a	 specialist	 in	 international
affairs	 and	 the	 author	 of	The	 Eurocentric
Conception	of	World	Politics,
[369]
	a	book	in	which
he	criticises	American	racism.	Hobson	writes	that
it	is	a	brilliant	idea	to	build	a	model	of	counter-
hegemony	 when	 there	 is	 a	 popular	 desire	 and
demand	for	one.	The	description	of	the	principles
of	counter-hegemony	takes	up	only	2	to	3	pages
in	his	book.	That	is	why	it	is	necessary	to	start

from	 the	 beginning,	 and	 figure	 out	 how	 to
conceive	of	a	counter-hegemony.
In	 order	 to	 conceive	 of	 counter-hegemony,
first	hegemony,	as	a	universalism	of	liberalism,
must	be	soundly	conceived	of	and	understood	as	a
unified	  monolithic	  context.	  Gramcianism
proposes	itself	as	a	strategy	of	counter-hegemony
—	 a	 spiritual	 alternative	 to	 liberalism	 in	 the
context	 of	 contemporary	 society.	 In	 the
beginning,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 think	 of	 counter-
hegemony	as	a	society	of	non-liberalism.	That	is
why	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 construct	 the	 non-
liberalism	 of	 tomorrow,	 and	 not	 the	 non-
liberalism	of	yesterday.	In	other	words:	the	non-
liberalism	 of	 the	 future,	 and	 not	 the	 non-
liberalism	of	the	past.	The	avant-garde	elements
of	 contemporary	 counter-hegemony	 are	 the
‘theory	of	the	multipolar	world’	and	the	‘Fourth
Political	 Theory’	 (4PT)	 which	 are	 being
developed	 in	 Russia	 in	 the	 context	 of	 the

International	Eurasia	Movement.
[370]
What	is	the	non-liberalism	of	the	past?	It	is	the
anti-liberal	 ideologies	 of	 the	 twentieth	 century,
those	 that	 were	 historically	 vanquished	 by
liberalism	 (Communism,	 conservatism,	 and
fascism).	All	of	these	ideologies	were	defeated	by
liberalism,	and	were	consequently	thrown	on	the
trash	 heap	 of	 history.	 The	 bearers	 of	 archaic,
Marxist,	 fascist	 and	 conservative-monarchical
discourses	 have	 already	 demonstrated	 that	 they
could	 not	 endure	 the	 historical	 battle	 with
hegemony.	That	is	why	these	ideologies,	as	far	as
the	establishing	of	a	counter-hegemonic	project	is
concerned,	can	be	seen	as	peripheral.
In	order	to	win	against	its	ideological	enemies,
liberalism	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century	 used
opposition	 to	 totalitarianism	 (in	 which	 the
conservative	and	Communist	projects	participated
against	 their	 will).	 To	 fight	 its	 ideological
enemies,	liberalism	in	the	twentieth	century	also

used	freedom	and	liberty,	or	‘freedom	from’	—
negative	freedom.
Today,	 liberalism	 has	 won	 out	 against	 all
others.	 ‘Freedom	 from’	 is	 now	 an	 irrefutable
right.	 We	 live	 in	 a	 liberal	 world,	 where	 an
individual	 does	 not	 have	 to	 free	 himself	 from
anything,	in	principle,	except	from	the	ground	and
from	his	own	humanity.	We	have	now	discovered
the	 purest	 essence	 of	 liberalism:	 freedom	 from
everything,	 which	 is	 nothing	 more	 than	 pure
nothingness	and	absolute	nihilism.
Today,	 against	 the	 hegemonic	 triumph	 of
liberalism,	stands	a	sluggish	Caesarism	in	its	last
days.	The	End	of	History	and	the	Last	Man	by
Francis	Fukuyama	could	not	have	anticipated	this.
However,	in	the	meantime...
Non-Liberalism	of	the	Future
What	does	it	mean	to	think	of	the	non-liberalism
of	 the	 future?	 It	 means	 to	 think	 of	 a	 non-

liberalism	which	is	born	from	the	dehumanisation
of	 man	 and	 the	 loss	 of	 gender	 identity,	 a	 non-
liberalism	 born	 out	 of	 a	 type	 of	 man	 who	 has
nothing.	It	means	to	see	the	horizon	of	liberalism
as	an	absolute	victory	over	Nothingness.	It	means
to	offer	an	alternative	not	from	without,	but	from
within.	It	means	that	ultimately,	liberalism	will
move	 beyond	 the	 boundaries	 of	 sociology	 and
will	become	a	thoroughly	anthropological	issue.
Society	 disintegrates,	 and	 then	 there	 is	 post-
society.	There	is	only	an	isolated	liberal	citizen	of
the	world,	a	cosmopolitan,	who,	in	fact,	does	not
belong	to	any	society.	
The	 Italian	 philosopher,	 Massimo	 Cacciari,
calls	this	‘a	society	made	up	entirely	of	idiots’,	a
society	 which	 loses	 the	 ability	 to	 communicate
amongst	 themselves,	 and	 losing	 everything	 that
they	have	common.	As	such,	they	have	their	own
unique	 languages,	 and	 carry	 out	 a	 rhizomatic
existence.	Here,	we	come	to	the	last	frontier	of

humanity.	This	is	where	counter-hegemony	will
take	off.
The	principal	course	of	counter-hegemony,	in
its	 anthropological	 iteration,	 is	 the	 idea	 of	 a
radical	 rethinking	 of	 freedom.	 Liberalism	 must
not	oppose	totalitarianism,	because	by	doing	so	it
only	 fuels	 its	 destructive	 power	 against	 the
principle	 of	 freedom	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 ‘freedom
for’,	 freedom	 as	 defined	 by	 John	 Stuart	 Mill.
Approaching	the	problem	in	which	the	individual
is	 placed	 above	 the	 whole	 of	 society	 from	 the
standpoint	of	anthropology,	it	is	not	conservative
values	 that	 work	 against	 liberalism,	 but
something	 radically	 different.	 This	 radically
different	thing	is	an	understanding	of	the	person,
that	 is,	 freedom	 against	 liberty,	 and	 a	 person
against	 individualism.	 In	 Christianity,	 such	 a
person	is	seen	as	the	fusion	of	the	divine	with	the
individual.	The	personality	is	born	at	the	moment
of	baptism.	In	religion,	the	idea	of	personality	is

described	 in	 various	 ways,	 and	 it	 is	 especially
beautifully	 represented	 in	 the	 works	 of	 Marcel
Mauss.
[371]
	In	any	society,	it	is	an	archaic	concept
of	the	person	when	the	person	is	at	the	centre	of
attention.	 This	 is	 not	 an	 individual;	 it	 is	 the
intersection	 of	 some	 spiritual	 or	 generalised
species,-	an	eidetic	subject.
An	 individual	 must	 rise	 against	 ‘freedom
from’	and	should	act	in	favour	of	the	‘freedom	to’
and	 not	 in	 favour	 of	 a	 lack	 of	 freedom,	 or	 in
favour	 of	 some	 form	 of	 collective	 community.
We	must	accept	the	challenge	of	nihilism,	in	the
sense	 of	 Martin	 Heidegger’s	 strict	 nihilism.
Furthermore,	Martin	Heidegger	proposed	building
a	philosophy	upon	the	inner	individual	according
to	the	principle	of	Dasein.
[372]
To	 conceive	 of	 counter-hegemony,	 one	 must
think	creatively.	Personal	freedom	is	at	the	heart
of	counter-hegemony.

A	Model	for	Counter-Society:	A	Pact
among	Intellectuals
The	counter-society	model	must	be	open	at	the
top;	such	is	the	principle	of	freedom.	At	the	head
of	this	society,	there	must	stand	those	who	are	the
most	open	to	the	heights	of	temperance,	and	who
are	not	fixated	on	themselves.	For	Plato,	this	was
philosophers	 who	 were	 contemplative.	 Plato’s
Republic	can	be	seen	as	the	political	expression
of	 Platonism,	 and	 the	 philosopher	 stands	 at	 its
head.	The	philosopher	does	not	so	much	rule	as
thinks,	 contemplates,	 and	 creates	 opportunities
for	 individuals	 and	 societies	 to	 become	 sacred.
The	 principle	 of	 the	 unsacred	 makes	 up	 the
backbone	 of	 the	 theory	 of	 counter-society.
Modern	power	should	not	only	be	intellectual,	but
should	 also	 be	 opposed	 to	 	 profanity.	 It	 must
restore	the	elements	of	the	sacred,	the	holy,	and
the	vertical	dimension	-	everything	that	was	cast
aside	 by	 modernity,	 leading	 humanity	 to	 the

emptiness	 and	 meaninglessness	 of	 its	 modern
liberal	iteration.
The	political	philosophy	of	verticalism	must
be	 a	 platform	 for	 the	 new,	 historic	 pact	 of
intellectuals.	If	we	create	this	pact	on	the	basis	of
pragmatic	alliances	alone,	we	will	 not	 succeed,
because	 liberalism	 will	 take	 over	 these
formations	sooner	or	later.
A	 historic	 pact	 of	 intellectuals	 must
necessarily	be	global;	it	cannot	be	limited	to	any
one	nationality,	country,	or	culture.	For	example,
even	 the	 totality	 of	 the	 Islamic	 world	 or	 the
Chinese	 cannot	 do	 this.	 It	 requires	 counter-
hegemony	 and	 a	 counter-hegemonic	 global
association	of	intellectuals	on	the	basis	of	an	open
philosophy	 and	 on	 a	 global	 scale.	 Around	 this
pact	 of	 intellectuals,	 there	 should	 be	 a
constellation	 of	 multi-scale	 systems,	 symmetric
with	 those	 envisaged	 by	 Joseph	 Nye	 in	 his
description	 of	 the	 transactional	 system	 of

liberalism	 (where	 actors	 are	 states,	 parties,
movements,	 industrial	 groups,	 religious	 groups,
and	even	individuals	all	in	one).
The	Will	and	Resources	of	the	New	Elite
Civilisation
Massimo	Cacciari’s	Archipelago
The	axis	of	counter-hegemonic	strategy	should	be
the	 construct	 ion	 of	 the	 will,	 and	 not	 material
resources.	 The	 will	 comes	 first,	 and	 then
resources.	 This	 shall	 proceed	 from	 the	 global
counter-hegemonic	 intellectual	 elite,	 which	 will
be	responsible	for	dialogue	between	civilisations.
A	civilised	elite	is	a	new	concept.	It	currently
does	 not	 exist.	 We	 are	 talking	 about	 a
combination	 of	 two	 elite	 qualities:	 a	 deep
assimilation	 of	 civilised	 culture	 (on	 the
philosophical,	religious,	and	moral	levels)	and	of
a	high	degree	of	passion,	the	kind	that	will	push	a
man	 to	 the	 heights	 of	 power,	 prestige,	 and

influence.	 Modern	 liberalism	 channels	 passion
exclusively	 into	 the	 fields	 of	 economics	 and
business,	 creating	 a	 privileged	 society	 that
advances	a	very	specific	type	of	individual	(which
the	American	sociologist	Yuri	Slezkine	calls	the
‘mercurial	type’).
[373]
The	 mercurial	 elite	 globalism	 of	 mondialist
nomadism,	expounded	by	Jacques	Attali,
[374]
	must
be	overthrown	in	favour	of	a	radically	different
type	 of	 elite.	 In	 every	 civilisation	 different
‘planets’	 can	 dominate,	 and	 not	 only	 furtively.
The	 mercenary	 Mercury	 reflects	 its	 installation
through	 the	 managers	 of	 cosmopolitanism.	 The
Islamic	 elite	 is	 clearly	 different;	 we	 see	 an
example	 of	 this	 in	 modern	 Iran,	 where	 politics
(Mars)	  and	  economics	  (Mercury)	  are
subordinated	 to	 spirituality	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 its
spiritual	leaders,	the	Ayatollahs	(Saturn).
However,	 ‘the	 world’	 is	 only	 a	 metaphor.
Different	 civilisations	 are	 based	 on	 different

codes.	 The	 primary	 thing	 is	 that	 the	 elite	 is
obliged	 to	 reflect	 the	 codes	 in	 itself,	 whatever
they	may	be.	This	is	an	essential	condition.	The
will	to	be	in	power	is	inherent	in	any	elite	and
must	 be	 intertwined	 with	 the	 will	 to	 have
knowledge.	 In	 other	 words,	 intellectualism	 and
activism	 should	 be	 united.	 Technical	 efficiency
and	values	(often	religious)	should	be	combined
in	such	an	elite.	Only	such	an	elite	will	be	able	to
participate	fully	and	responsibly	in	the	dialogue
of	civilisation;	they	will	embody	the	principles	of
their	  traditions	  and	  engage	  with	  the
representatives	of	other	civilisations.
What	  resources	  can	  this	  constitutive
intellectual	elite	depend	on?	First	of	all,	it	is	the
Second	 World,	 which	 Parag	 Khanna	 writes
about,
[375]
	the	BRICS	countries,	and	those	states
that	have	not	received	anything	or	are	not	in	the
first	 caste	 under	 the	 existing	 status	 quo.	 This
makes	 up	 most	 nations	 in	 the	 current	 state	 of

hegemony.	Note	that	these	countries	will	not	take
up	the	intellectual	projects	of	counter-hegemony
of	their	own	accord.
The	ruling	regimes	in	these	countries,	if	they
do	 not	 step	 up,	 will	 continue	 to	 engage	 in
trasformismo.	 Counter-hegemonic	 intellectuals
must	counterattack	them,	including	in	their	own
projects,	 instead	 of	 waiting	 until	 they	 are
summoned	to	work	within	the	administration	of	a
state.	It	is	important	to	understand	that	the	states
engaged	  in	trasformismo	 will	 be	 engaged
regardless	of	the	place.	China,	Iran,	Azerbaijan,
India,	 Russia,	 and	 all	 the	 BRICS	 countries	 are
undergoing	continuous	trasformismo.	
Counter-hegemonic	intellectuals	should	 seize
the	narrative	and	dictate	the	agenda	of	these	states
to	enable	them	to	implement	Caesarism	as	far	as
possible.	Although	the	goal	of	counter-hegemony
is	something	different,	these	countries	hold	great
potential.	They	are	a	good	resource	and	a	tool	to

achieve	that	goal.	This	is	an	acceptable	strategy.
For	 example,	 Russia	 is	 a	 country	 with	 nuclear
weapons	that	it	can	use	as	an	argument	against
hegemony.	This	looks	really	impressive.	
Also,	as	a	counter-hegemonic	resource,	groups
that	are	relevant	to	the	historic	pact	are:	the	anti-
liberal	orientation	of	various	parties	throughout
the	world	(regardless	of	whether	they	are	Right	or
Left),	 socialists	 or	 conservatives;	 various
movements	of	the	vertical-open	type	 :	 cultural,
artistic,	 aesthetic,	 and	 environmental;	 whole
social	 classes	 and	 industry,	 as	 for	 example	 the
peasantry	 and	 global	 industry,	 which	 sooner	 or
later	 will	 become	 victims	 of	 the	 banking	 and
financial	system,	as	well	as	the	tertiary	sector	of
the	economy,	which	is	already	collapsing	in	the
face	 of	 the	 growth	 of	 speculative	 globalist
financial	capital;	and	traditional	religion,	which,
in	 essence,	 is	 non-liberal	 except	 for	 those
religions	 of	 a	 liberal	 orientation,	 which	 are

basically	secular	and	relativistic.
The	task	of	the	historical	counter-hegemonic
bloc	is	to	combine	all	of	these	resources	into	a
global	 network.	 For	 this,	 the	 ‘archipelago’
concept	of	Massimo	Cacciari	is	especially	useful,
and	which	he	applies	to	Europe,	though	this	idea
can	 be	 spread	 wider.	 Massimo	 Cacciari	 argues
that	 between	 the	 universalist	logos	 and	 the
anarchy	of	atomist	idiots,	there	exists	a	personal
logos,	  the	logoi	 of	 particular	 civilisations:
cultures	 that	 use	 a	 complex	 model	 in	 which
dialogue	 and	 the	 integration	 of	 Right	 and	 Left
into	a	single	historic	pact	can	make	significant
progress.
Russia	and	the	Hegemony
From	 the	 point	 of	 view	 of	 the	 authors	 of	 the
theory	of	counter-hegemony,	Russia	is	currently	a
field	of	a	typical	trasformismo,	and	what	is	called
Putinism	is	nothing	short	of	Caesarism.	Putinism

opposes	 hegemony	 in	 the	 face	 of	 internal
opposition	and	the	‘white	ribbon	carrying’	Echo
of	Moscow,	as	well	as	foreign	hegemony,	which
puts	 pressure	 on	 Russia	 from	 the	 outside.	 It
attempts	 to	 maintain	 a	 balance	 between
Caesarism,	 which	 is	 trying	 to	 steer	 towards
modernisation	on	the	one	hand,	and	on	the	other
towards	conservatism,	in	an	attempt	to	hold	onto
power	 by	 any	 means.	 This	 description	 looks
extremely	crude,	but	rationally	and	realistically
there	are	no	ideas,	no	ideology,	no	goals,	and	no
understanding	of	the	historical	process.	There	is
no	telos
[376]
	here;	it	is	simply	the	Caesarism	of	a
Gramscian.	This	is	how	we	have	arrived	at	all	the
inconsistencies	 and	 reticence,	 hesitation	 and
indecision,	and	balancing	and	unpredictability	of
Putin’s	policies.	
However,	the	opposition	put	up	by	the	internal
and	 external	 forces	 of	 hegemony	 against	 this
Caesarism	 need	 for	 Putin	 to	 move	 in	 the	 right

direction;	this	is	necessary	for	intellectuals	of	the
counter-hegemony.	 However,	trasformismo	is	an
adaptive-passive	strategy;	this	means	that	sooner
or	 later,	 the	 purpose	 of	 this	trasformismo	 will
destroy	Caesarism.	In	this	sense,	it	is	a	negative
initiative	that	looks	like	modernisation	and	which
objectively	 leads	 to	 the	 strengthening	 of	 the
middle	class,	the	classic	enemy	of	the	state,	as
well	 as	 the	 bourgeoisie;	 capitalism	 and
individualism	 are	 the	 enemies	 of	 a	 concrete
society,	and	humanity	as	a	whole.
How	soon	will	Caesarism	fall?	History	shows
that	 it	 can	 carry	 on	 for	 a	 very	 long	 time.
Theoretically,	it	should	fall,	but	it	continues	to
exist,	sometimes	becoming	quite	successful.	It	all
depends	 on	 how	 successfully	 or	 unsuccessfully
trasformismo	 is	 implemented.	 In	 this	 doomed
passive	strategy,	sometimes	the	most	paradoxical
way	can	be	the	most	efficient.
It	is	quite	obvious	that	if	we	accept	that	over

the	past	13	years	Russia	practiced	precisely	this
strategy,	 it	 should	 be	 recognised	 that	 general
ideological	pragmatism	is	omnivorous,	and	it	will
continue	to	exist,	despite	an	outcry.	Nevertheless,
it	 is	 worth	 noting	 that	 it	 was	 successful
trasformismo	that	saved	the	state	from	the	fact
that	its	representatives	have	not	yet	destroyed	the
global	hegemony.
Today,	 it	 seems	 to	 us	 that	 we	 should	 not
identify	 the	 national	 interests	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 with	 that	 line	 of	 strategic	 planning
seen	 in	 Putin’s	 rule,	 which	 can	 be	 perfectly
described	by	the	term	trasformismo.
However,	this	is	not	enough.	The	right	strategy
requires	 a	 completely	 different	 sort	 of	 type;	 it
requires	  something	  thoroughly	  counter-
hegemonic	in	its	very	essence.	The	right	strategy
must	promote	the	theory	of	a	multipolar	world,
rooted	in	the	activities	of	the	historic	pact	of	anti-
globalisation.

Another	  important	  initiative	  is	  the
International	  Eurasia	  Movement’s	  Global
Revolutionary	Alliance.
[377]
	This	is	a	quite	active
strategy	 that	 can	 be	 developed	 in	 parallel	 with
Russia,	 being	 both	 Russian	 and	 international.
Even	if	there	are	conflicts	of	interest	between	the
Global	 Revolutionary	 Alliance	 and	 Europe	 or
America	(and	there	are	a	lot	of	them),	this	point
should	 not	 embarrass,	 let	 alone	 stop	 anyone.
People	choose	the	same	counter-hegemonic	ethics
even	when	they	run	contrary	to	those	societies	in
which	they	live.
In	 rejecting	 hegemony,	 we	 need	 not	 rely	 on
power.	 Now,	 we	 have	 the	 ability	 to	 say	 ‘yes’
because	we	are	on	the	same	side	as	the	current
political	 power	 in	 our	 country:	 we	 oppose
hegemony	 and	 those	 in	 power	 are	 against
hegemony.	  However,	  even	  if	  hegemony
triumphed	 in	 Russia,	 this	 situation	 should	 not
influence	 the	 decision-making	 of	 the	 counter-

hegemonic	intellectual	elite,	as	it	should	work	in
the	 name	 of	 fundamental	 objectives.	 Only	 by
focusing	solely	on	the	concept	of	eschatology,	on
telos,	 and	 the	 target,	 rather	 than	 on	 short-term
benefits,	can	victory	and	success	be	realised.
This	historic	pact	of	intellectuals,	 with	 their
open	 philosophy	 of	 verticalism,	 can	 be	 in
solidarity	 with	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 in	 its
present	 state	 as	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important
elements	of	the	counter-hegemonic	archipelago.
Putin’s	nuclear	Russia	is	a	great	island	in	the
archipelago;	 it	 is	 perfectly	 suitable	 for	 waging
external	revolutionary	struggle.	It	is	a	wonderful
base	 for	 training	 people	 who	 need	 to	 promote
eschatological	revolutionary	activities	on	a	global
scale.	This	is	a	valuable	tool,	but	without	it	things
would	continue	all	the	same.	We	must	look	for
contacts	with	China,	Iran,	India,	Latin	America,
with	 counter-hegemonic	 forces	 in	 African
countries,	 Asian	 countries,	 Europe,	 Canada,

Australia,	and	so	on.	Everyone	who	is	dissatisfied
is	a	potential	member	of	the	counter-hegemonic
archipelago,	from	states	to	individuals.	
These	 are	 different	 things:	 Russia’s	 national
interests,	as	far	as	they	pertain	to	counter-society,
go	 beyond	 its	 territory	 and	 the	 archipelago.
Counter-hegemony	 must	 think	 outside	 the
ideological	constraints	of	sectarianism	if	we	want
to	 create	 a	 counter-hegemonic	 bloc.	 The
composition	 of	 the	 bloc	 must	 include	 all	 the
representatives	 of	 the	 anti-bourgeois,	 anti-
capitalist	forces:	Left,	Right	or	even	those	who
defy	 classification	 (Alain	 de	 Benoist
[378]
	 has
consistently	 stressed	 that	 the	 divide	 between
‘Left’	 and	 ‘Right’	 is	 outdated.	 Today	 it	 is	 far
more	 important	 whether	 someone	 stands	 for
hegemony	 or	 against	 it.)	 Thus,	 modern
Gramscianism	 calls	 for	 a	 counter-hegemonic
bloc,	a	Global	Revolutionary	Alliance,	that	brings
together	all	the	enemies	of	capitalism	and	those

who	oppose	the	hegemony	of	Eurocentrism	and
racism	 (which	 are	 implicit	 in	 the	 ideas	 that
underpin	 the	 universality	 of	 Western	 cultural
values,	the	superiority	of	Western	civilisation	and
modernisation).	When	placed	in	the	context	of	the
theory	 of	 the	 multipolar	 world,	 the	 theory	 of
counter-hegemony	occupies	specific	cultural	and
civilisational	 areas	 in	 the	 non-Eurocentric
universal	 plurality.	 Modern	 counter-hegemony
should	be	inclusive,	that	is,	it	should	encompass
all	critiques	of	hegemony,	from	both	the	Right
and	 the	 Left,	 and	 it	 should	 be	 inclusive	 of	 the
positions	 and	 theories	 beyond	 the	 political
ideologies	 of	 modernity.	 This	 is	 the	 Fourth
Political	Theory,	about	which	I	wrote	a	book	of
the	same	name,	and	which	has	been	published	in
many	European	and	Asian	languages.
4PT
What	is	the	Fourth	Political	Theory?

The	 model	 of	 globalisation	 functioning	 today
forces	all	countries,	nations	and	civilisations	to
make	 a	 fundamental	 choice:	 to	 accept	 the
hegemonic	liberal	model	or	to	look	for	their	own,
individual	modes	of	development;	to	choose	the
path	of	resisting	globalisation	and	thus	find	their
own	answers	to	its	challenges.	To	maintain	the
status	 quo	 today	 without	 responding	 to
globalisation	in	some	way	is	impossible,	because
the	 passive	 observation	 of	 its	 unfolding	 ‘of	 its
own	  accord’	  inevitably	  leads	  to	  de-
sovereiginisation	 and	 the	 introduction	 of
governing	 structures	 from	 the	 outside;	 in	 other
words,	to	countries	losing	their	independence	and
freedom.	 The	trasformismo	 trend	 in	 Russian
politics	is	currently	leading	to	just	that.
History	 challenges	 Russia	 not	 just	 with
liberalism	 and	 post-liberalism,	 but	 also	 with
postmodernity,	globalism	and	hegemony.	Today,
it	is	easy	to	see	that	the	‘brave	new	world’	of

globalism,	postmodernity	and	post-liberalism	has
no	place	for	Russia	in	it.	The	issue	is	not	just	that
the	 world	 government	 and	 the	 world	 state	 will
eventually	 abolish	 all	 national	 governments
altogether.	 The	 issue	 is	 that	 the	 entire	 span	 of
Russian	 history	 is	 a	 dialectic	 struggle	 with	 the
West	 and	 Western	 culture,	 the	 struggle	 to
maintain	 its	 own	 (often	 only	 intuited)	 Russian
truth,	its	own	messianic	idea,	and	its	own	version
of	the	‘end	of	history’,	be	it	expressed	through	the
Muscovite	Orthodox	tradition,	the	secular	empire
of	Peter	I,
[379]
	or	the	global	Communist	revolution.
The	best	minds	of	Russia	saw	the	West	headed
towards	the	abyss,	and	today,	looking	at	where	the
neoliberal	economy	and	postmodern	culture	has
taken	 the	 world,	 we	 can	 see	 clearly	 that	 this
intuition	 that	 drove	 generations	 of	 Russians	 in
search	of	an	alternative	was	more	than	justified.
The	current	economic	crisis	is	just	the	start.	The
worst	is	yet	to	come.	The	inertia	of	post-liberal

movement	is	such	that	there	is	no	possible	way	to
change	 its	 course.	 ‘Liberated	 technics’	 (Oswald
Spengler)
[380]
	will	seek	more	and	more	efficient,
but	purely	technical	and	technological	means	to
save	 the	 West.	 This	 is	 the	 new	 stage	 of
technological	 and	 technical	 advancement,	 this
worldwide	 spread	 of	 the	 nihilistic	 stain	 of	 the
global	market.	It	is	clear	that	Russia	must	seek	a
separate	way.	Its	own	way.	But	therein	lies	the
issue.	Dodging	the	logic	of	postmodernism	in	a
single	country	is	not	that	simple.
What	 can	 be	 used	 to	 oppose	 global	 liberal
hegemony	 in	 this	 day	 and	 age?	 The	 twentieth
century	was	the	century	of	ideologies	(liberalism,
Communism,	 and	 fascism).	 All	 of	 them	 were
products	of	the	new	age	(modernity),	and	each	of
them	 offered	 a	 worldview	 and	 sociopolitical
project.	 Two	 of	 these	 have	 already	 proven
fruitless,	 and	 liberalism	 is	 in	 crisis	 today	 —
meaning	 the	 collapse	 of	 the	 world’s	 financial

system,	economic	crisis,	and	the	degradation	of
capitalistic	social	strategies.
We	 need	 an	 alternative.	 This	 alternative	 to
liberalism	 should	 be	 utterly	 new:	 invented,
discovered,	or	even	hard-won,	if	you	will.	Perhaps
it	will	be	an	insight,	but	we	must	think	and	live	in
this	direction	—	towards	the	expectation	of	some
counter-liberal	ideology.
The	liberals	are	agonising.	What	is	to	replace
the	collapsing	ideologeme	and	take	its	place?
This	open	question	is	what	is	called	the	Fourth
Political	 Theory.	 It	 requires	 close	 attention.	 It
cannot	be	solved	with	technology.	Today	we	are
living	not	in	a	simple	glitch	of	the	system,	but	in
a	 full-blown	 collapse	 of	 the	 liberal	 order.	 This
systemic	 and	 structural	 crisis	 will	 not	 leave
anything	 as	 it	 has	 been.	 If	 Putin	 ignores	 the
severity	of	this	challenge	to	his	worldview,	we
risk	being	simply	buried	under	the	debris	of	the
inevitable	collapse	of	the	liberal	system.

For	Russia	to	persevere,	even	now	we	must	be
directing	intellectual	effort	primarily	towards	the
coming	alternative,	towards	what	is	to	come	to
replace	collapsing	liberalism.
There	 is	 no	 ready	 answer.	 Both	 will	 and
imagination	must	strive	to	grasp	the	realities	of
the	globalist	world,	to	decipher	the	challenges	of
postmodernity	 and	 create	 something	 new;
something	different	from	the	defeated	ideologies
of	the	past	centuries	(Communism,	fascism)	and
the	victorious	one	(liberalism),	which	was	found
to	be	wanting	by	the	majority	of	humankind.
Russia	needs	a	new	political	theory:	the	Fourth
Political	Theory.	It’s	the	fourth	because	the	first
two	political	theories,	Communism	and	fascism,
lost	the	historical	battle	in	the	twentieth	century,
and	the	third,	liberalism,	proved	unsatisfactory	to
the	majority	of	humanity.	We	are	talking	about	a
theory	 specifically,	 because	 any	 projects	 that
merely	touch	up	the	surface	and	that	are	aimed	at

repairing	the	situation,	and	to	correct	the	status
quo	will	only	be	an	utter	waste	of	time.	It	is	a
political	theory	specifically	because	politics	must
not	fade	from	human	history,	which	would	turn
politics	 into	 ‘government	 as	 an	 act’,	 a	 merely
technical	manipulation	of	the	world’s	managers.
For	 Russia,	 it	 is	 the	 question	 of	 life	 or	 death,
Hamlet’s	question.	If	Russia	chooses	‘to	be’,	this
automatically	means	creating	the	Fourth	Political
Theory.	Otherwise,	the	choice	is	‘not	to	be’,	and
Russia	will	quietly	fade	from	the	arena	of	history,
merge	 with	 the	 globalised	 world,	 and	 become
reimagined	and	governed	by	others.
4PT	as	a	Universal	Ideology
The	Fourth	Political	Theory	is	a	model	for	the
political	organisation	of	a	multipolar	world,	and
which	 should	 arise	 to	 replace	 contemporary
unipolarity.	 The	 basis	 of	 this	 theory	 lies	 in	 a
critical	 re-evaluation	 of	 the	 traditional	 political

ideologies	formed	in	the	nineteenth	and	twentieth
centuries.	 In	 the	 broadest	 terms,	 the	 Fourth
Political	Theory	as	a	basis	for	a	new	worldview
and	the	architecture	of	a	multipolar	world	can	be
described	 through	 the	 dialectic	 rejection	 of	 the
three	 primary	 ideologies	 that	 existed	 in	 human
history:	liberalism,	Communism	and	fascism.
The	  Fourth	  Political	  Theory	  opposes
liberalism	as	an	ideology	that	puts	the	individual
at	the	centre,	but	adopts	the	values	of	freedom.
This	value	should,	however,	fit	a	different	idea,
and	 take	 for	 its	 social	 subject	 something	 other
than	the	individual.
A	 review	 of	 the	 second	 political	 theory,
Marxism,	is	informed	by	the	inadequacy	of	the
historical	 prognoses	 of	 Marx	 himself,	 who
predicted	 the	 inevitability	 of	 the	 socialist
revolutions	in	the	developed	bourgeois	societies
of	 Europe	 (where	 they	 never	 happened)	 and
rejected	 the	 possibility	 of	 such	 revolutions

occurring	 in	 the	 societies	 of	 Asia	 and	 Russia
(where	they	happened	only	partially).
Historical	 materialism,	 uncritical	 faith	 in
progress	and	dogmatic	atheism	are	unacceptable
aspects	 of	 Marxism;	 but	 alongside	 those,
Marxism	 also	 gives	 a	 precise	 analysis	 of	 the
alienation	rampant	in	a	bourgeois	society,	justly
criticises	 capitalism	 and	 the	 mechanics	 of
allocating	 surplus	 value,	 and	 predicts	 its
inevitable	 crises	 and	 describes	 their	 mechanics.
The	critique	of	capitalism	can	be	transferred	to
current	circumstances	as	well,	while	singling	out
class	as	the	subject	of	history	can	be	dismissed	as
inadequate.	The	Fourth	Political	Theory	accepts
the	 Marxist	 analysis	 of	 alienation	 in	 bourgeois
society.
When	it	comes	to	the	ideologies	of	the	‘Third
Way’	 (fascism,	 National	 Socialism,	 etc.),	 it’s
imperative	 to	 reject	 racism	 as	 the	 idea	 of	 an
inherent	superiority	of	the	people	of	one	race	over

another.	At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 Fourth	 Political
Theory	expands	the	critique	of	racism	to	not	only
biological	 racism	 and	 nationalism,	 but	 into	 all
forms	of	the	acceptance	of	inequality	in	human
societies,	 whether	 based	 on	 cultural,	 religious,
technological	 or	 economic	 grounds.	 The	 Fourth
Political	Theory	rejects	all	forms	of	racism	and
refuses	 to	 consider	 ‘race’	 or	 the	 ‘state’	 as	 the
subject	of	history.	In	the	context	of	international
relations	it	translates	into	the	acceptance	of	the
equality	of	all	societies	and	civilisations,	and	all
nations	and	cultures	across	the	globe	regardless	of
skin	 colour	 or	 their	 level	 of	 development.
Likewise	it	refuses	to	single	out	any	one	specific
set	of	values,	Eastern	or	Western,	as	universal.
Certain	aspects	of	the	‘Third	Way’	can	be	seen	as
positive	—	primarily	the	interest	that	some	of	its
atypical	and	dissenting	thinkers	took	in	the	values
of	 ‘peoples’	 and	 ‘ethnicities’	 in	 world	 history,
and	these	concepts	should	always	be	used	in	the

plural.	 Other	 important	 aspects	 are	 its	 legal
theory	 of	 ‘Large	 Spaces’	 and	 the	 theory	 of	 the
‘rights	 of	 peoples’	 and	 ‘political	 theology’,	 as
developed	 by	 the	 thinkers	 of	 the	 German
Conservative	 Revolution	 (the	 Right-wing	 anti-
Hitler	opposition).
The	Fourth	Political	Theory	and
Heidegger’s	Dasein
The	 Fourth	 Political	 Theory	 rejects	 the
capitalism,	individualism	and	‘religion	of	money’
within	 liberalism;	 in	 Communism,	 materialism,
atheism,	 progressivism	 and	 the	 theory	 of	 class
struggle;	 in	 fascism,	 all	 forms	 of	 racism,
totalitarianism	and	the	idea	of	the	dominance	of
one	culture	over	another.	On	the	other	hand,	the
Fourth	Political	Theory	borrows	the	idea	of	the
value	 of	 freedom	 from	 liberalism;	 the	 ethical
ideal	 of	 justice,	 equality	 and	 the	 harmonious
development	 of	 coexistence	 based	 on	 the

overcoming	 of	 alienation	 from	 Marxism;	 and
from	 the	 ‘Third	 Way’	 it	 takes	 the	 values	 of
ethnos,	nation,	religion,	spirituality,	family,	and
the	sacred.
These	 principles	 are	 entirely	 sufficient	 to
construct	 a	 pluralistic	 and	 open	 system	 of
intercultural	and	inter-civilisational	dialogue.
The	 subject	 of	 the	 Fourth	 Political	 Theory
ought	not	to	be	the	individual,	class,	race	or	the
state,	but	Dasein	—	human	existence,	present	and
well-grounded	in	its	organic,	cultural,	linguistic
and	spiritual	history.	The	term	Dasein	is	the	basis
of	 Martin	 Heidegger’s	 philosophy	 and	 is
borrowed	 by	 the	 Fourth	 Political	 Theory	 as
essential	 to	 understanding	 the	 subject	 of	 the
contemporary	political	process.
From	the	philosophical	standpoint,	the	Fourth
Political	Theory	can	be	attributed	to	the	fields	of
phenomenology,	 structuralism,	 existentialism,
ethno-sociology	 and	 cultural	 anthropology.	 All

these	 philosophical	 and	 humanitarian	 fields	 of
study	focus	on	the	variety	of	human	cultures	and
see	 this	 variety	 as	 the	 highest	 value	 and	 the
treasure	of	the	human	spirit,	something	that	must
not	be	eradicated	and	levelled	out	but	carefully
preserved,	supported	and	protected	in	every	way.
All	 conflicts	 and	 disagreements	 should	 not	 be
solved	  via	  violence,	  universalism	  and
colonisation	(whichever	apologist	phraseology	it
may	 hide	 behind),	 but	 through	 harmony	 and	 a
dialogue	between	civilisations.
The	Fourth	Political	Theory	is	an	answer	to	the
challenge	of	postmodernity,	which	stems	from	the
logic	 of	 forgetting	 the	 essence	 of	 being	 and	 in
removing	 humanity	 from	 its	 ontological	 and
theological	 (spiritual)	 roots.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
respond	 to	 that	 with	 ‘one-day	 solution’
innovations	or	PR	surrogates.	It	appears	that	in
order	 to	 solve	 the	 most	 pressing	 issues	 of	 the
global	 economic	 crisis,	 in	 order	 to	 resist	 the

unipolar	  world,	  maintain	  and	  preserve
sovereignty,	and	so	on,	it	is	essential	to	turn	to	the
philosophical	 basis	 of	 history	 and	 to	 make	 a
metaphysical	effort.	The	Fourth	Political	Theory
cannot	emerge	on	its	own.	An	exertion	of	will	is
required	 here,	 conceptual	 work:	 a	 disagreement
with	postmodernity	and	with	the	status	quo;	with
the	inertia-propelled	development	of	history;	with
the	disappearance	of	politics	from	life;	and	with
the	 utter	 alienation	 of	 the	 individual	 from	 the
sphere	of	politics,	spirit,	culture,	civilisation,	and
from	 humanity	 in	 general.	 The	 Fourth	 Political
Theory	is	a	crusade	against	 postmodernity,	 and
against	the	post-industrial	society,	liberalism	and
globalism.	 This	 is	 the	 strategy	 of	 riding
postmodernity;	 much	 like	 how	 the	 Eastern
practices	 offer	 to	 ‘ride	 the	 tiger’.
[381]
	 This	 is	 a
search	 and	 a	 discovery	 of	 weak	 points	 in	 the
global	systems	and	the	hacking	of	those	points.	It
is	not	possible	to	just	walk	past	postmodernity,

globalism	and	hegemony	and	merely	ignore	them.
Hence	why	the	Fourth	Political	Theory	must	turn
to	 the	 precursors	 to	 modernity	 and	 to	 what
modernity	 actively	 fought,	 but	 what	 became
almost	entirely	irrelevant	to	postmodernity.	We
must	 turn	 to	 tradition,	 to	 pre-modernity,
archaism,	 theology,	 the	 sacred	 sciences,	 and
ancient	philosophy.	In	Russia’s	case	that	means
turning	 to	 the	 full	 Orthodox	 tradition,	 to	 its
sources,	to	the	mystical	Orthodoxy	of	Byzantium,
to	even	more	ancient	Platonic	and	Neo-Platonic
doctrines,	to	the	archaic	layers	of	tradition,	and	to
the	 highest	 super-rational	 creeds.	 Within	 the
framework	of	the	Fourth	Political	Theory	we	are
also	 talking	 about	 a	 profound	 philosophical
comprehension	 of	 being,	 about	 opening	 up	 the
deep	ontological	source	of	human	existence,	and	a
careful	understanding	of	the	philosophical	depth
of	experience	that	was	made	by	Martin	Heidegger
—	a	thinker	who	made	the	unique	effort	of	trying

to	construct	a	fundamental	ontology	—	a	deep,
paradoxical,	piercing	teaching	about	being.
The	Fourth	Political	Theory	cannot	be	a	task
undertaken	 by	 an	 individual	 or	 even	 a	 limited
group	of	people	—	it	is	for	everyone	to	partake	in.
This	 effort	 must	 be	 a	 collective	 one.
Representatives	of	other	cultures	from	both	Asia
and	 Europe	 can	 help	 us	 here,	 as	 they	 feel	 the
eschatological	 tension	 of	 the	 moment	 just	 as
sharply,	and	they	are	just	as	desperately	seeking
an	escape	from	the	worldwide	dead	end.
The	Fourth	Political	Theory	must	be	developed
by	various	peoples	and	cultures,	and	everyone	can
contribute.	However,	Russia,	located	in	Eurasia,
at	 the	 intersection	 of	 the	 cultural	 and
civilisational	 tendencies	 of	 East	 and	 West,	 is
destined	 to	 stand	 at	 the	 focal	 point	 of	 this
conceptual	 process	 by	 the	 merit	 of	 its	 location
alone.	 It	 comes	 as	 no	 surprise	 that	 the	 first
systematic	 thoughts	 concerning	 this	 theory

emerged	in	Russia.
Gramscian	 counter-hegemony	 calls	 for	 the
formation	of	a	counter-hegemonic	block,	a	Global
Revolutionary	 Alliance	 which	 joins	 all	 those
opposing	capitalism	and	hegemony,	Eurocentrism
and	racism,	all	of	which	are	implicit	in	the	idea	of
the	 universality	 of	 Western	 cultural	 values,	 the
superiority	  of	  Western	  civilisation	  and
modernisation.	In	the	context	of	the	theory	of	the
multipolar	world	and	the	Fourth	Political	Theory,
the	theory	of	counter-hegemony	gains	a	concrete
cultural	 and	 civilisational	 space	 of	 a	 non-
Eurocentric	 pluralistic	 universe.	 Contemporary
counter-hegemony	 must	 be	 inclusive,	 which
means	 engaging	 with	 all	 types	 of	 resistance	 to
hegemony;	this	involves	the	Left	and	the	Right,
and	 positions	 and	 theories	 that	 are	 outside	 the
boundaries	 of	 the	 political	 ideologies	 of
modernity	 within	 the	 framework	 of	 the	 Fourth
Political	Theory.

Conclusion
‘He	is	Simply	the	Best’
This	 book	 contains	 reflections	 on	 Russia,	 its
government,	and	its	policies	and	problems	during
the	 past	 13	 years.	 It	 is	 an	 uninterrupted,	 if
emotionally	 charged,	 flow	 of	 reflections,
philosophical	 evaluations,	 and	 disjointed	 notes,
held	 together	 by	 an	 unwavering	 and	 painful
concern	about	the	fate	of	the	Motherland,	Great
Russia,	and	about	our	incredible	and	mysterious
people,	 for	 whom	 I	 feel	 a	 boundless	 love	 and
worry	 about	 infinitely	 with	 all	 my	 heart.
Naturally,	these	reflections	are	bound	to	turn	to
power	  and	  its	  embodiment:	  Vladimir
Vladimirovitch	 Putin.	 Hope	 and	 disappointment
do	not	simply	swap	places	here,	but	follow	one
another,	coexist	even.	It	is	clear	that	we	cannot
calmly	 stand	 by	 as	 many	 painful	 processes
emerge.	 We	 want	 to	 question	 those	 in	 power:

‘Why	are	you	dawdling?	Why	are	you	standing
there	 instead	 of	 doing	 something?’	 There	 is	 a
desire	to	force	something,	to	somehow	encourage,
perhaps	even	exclaim:	‘Vladimir	Vladimirovitch,
please,	please	fire	this	(or	other)	PR-monster	who
is	letting	you	down,	and	making	you	seem	like	a
buffoon	or	an	idiot!’,	even	if	maybe	those	things
should	be	ignored.	My	analysis	constantly	moves
to	the	sphere	of	ideas,	to	structures	and	concepts
that	move	and	construct	themselves	following	a
different	logic	—	in	the	cold,	introspective	skies
of	connotations.	This	comparison	of	earthly	strife
and	 the	 clear	 shining	 light	 of	 abstract	 ideas	 is
what	is	truly	important.
Nietzsche	 said	 once,	 after	 being	 rejected	 by
Lou	Andreas-Salomé:
[382]
	‘If	I	were	God,	I	would
have	created	Lou	Salomé	differently.’	If	I	were
the	 President	 of	 Russia,	 I	 would	 have	 done
everything	differently,	not	like	Putin	has.	I	accept
some	of	it	as	correct,	but	see	some	other	things	as

mistakes.	 Sadly,	 the	 final	 balance	 is	 the	 same:
he’s	exactly	half	right	and	half	wrong.	Putin	is	so
steady	in	his	self-defence	and	even	imposing	of
his	half-rightness	—	he	takes	no	side	steps.	I	am
confident	that	it	will	cost	him.	13	years	in	power
is	a	very	long	time.	He	will	not	change,	and	this	is
very	nearly	a	sentence	—	ot	my	sentence,	but	the
sentence	of	the	Russian	Idea.	I	say	that	with	the
most	 sincere	 regret	 and	 sorrow.	 So	 far,	 Putin
embodies	the	empty,	technological	present,	which
is	getting	harder	and	harder	to	bear.	However,	the
moment	you	compare	Putin	to	the	leaders	of	other
countries	(Western	ones,	of	course),	you	end	up	at
the	 other	 extreme.	 There	 are	 no	 equals,	 he	 is
simply	the	best.	And	that	is	the	truth.
Vladimir	Putin’s	Last	Chance
What	is	the	essence	of	Putin’s	position	today,	the
Putin	 of	 the	 third	 term?	 I	 have	 always	 aligned
myself	 with	 the	 ‘third	 term	 party’...	 and	 it

arrived.	What	can	we	expect?
Today	 we	 know	 several	 of	 Putin’s	 formulas
that	I	have	been	reflecting	on	for	many	years.	The
first	 one	 is	 simple	 and	 contradictory	 at	 once:
‘patriotism	 plus	 liberalism’.	 Now	 it’s	 being
joined	by	two	more,	possibly	clarifying	the	first:
‘Putin	the	realist’	and	‘Putin	as	the	embodiment
of	the	idea	of	Caesarism	and	trasformismo’.
Each	 of	 these	 formulas	 and	 all	 of	 them
together	 form	 Putin’s	 own	 brand	 of	 a	 ‘Putin
kōan’,	 his	 own	 personal	 ideological	 antimony,
reflecting	the	structure	of	his	personal	and	power-
related	compromise.	The	essence	of	the	formulas
reflects	 that	 our	 President	 is	 equally	 close	 to
sovereignty,	 superpower	 statehood,	 vertical
power,	 nationality,	 and	 religion;	 as	 well	 as	 to
Westernisation,	   modernisation,	   effective
management,	 and	 liberal	 reformism	 in	 the
economy.	We	have	lived	in	the	structure	of	these
formulas,	 combining	 the	 incongruous,	 in	 these

coincidentia	oppositorum
[383]
	for	the	last	12	years.
It	seemed	like	an	eternity,	and	yet	flew	by	in	the
blink	of	an	eye.	Russians	supported	Putin	for	his
patriotism	 —	 the	 people	 and	 the	 masses;	 the
ordinary	 people	 and	 many	 an	 extraordinary
person.	Because	of	his	liberalism	and	because	he
maintained	the	economic	domination	of	the	big
bourgeoisie,	or,	essentially,	the	oligarchy	that	was
established	in	the	turbulent	’90s,	he	was	put	up
with	by	the	economic	elites.	At	the	same	time,	all
the	active	political	forces	were	eager	for	Putin	to
step	outside	this	compromise,	in	which	patriotism
was	balanced	by	liberalism	and	the	pro-Western
liberal	 reforms	 were	 cancelled	 by	 leaning	 on
sovereignty	 and	 the	 consolidation	 of	 vertical
power.	 And	 yet	 Putin	 kept	 delaying	 year	 after
year,	hesitating,	insisting	on	his	vision.	He	forced
the	 masses	 to	 obediently	 endure	 the	 economic
injustices	 of	 uncontrolled	 capitalism	 and	 the
unrestrained	orgy	of	corruption,	while	he	forced

the	elites	to	falsely	don	the	robes	of	patriotism.
The	 theory	 of	 international	 relations	 calls	 this
trasformismo,	a	doublethink	policy	in	which	the
autocratic	 ruler	 defends	 the	 sovereignty	 of	 the
country	 against	 the	 world’s	 hegemony,	 while
eventually	 being	 forced	 to	 make	 concessions.
Gradually	 this	 doublethink	 becomes	 unbearable
for	both	the	patriots	and	the	liberals.	The	‘Putin
kōans’,	which	society	has	more	or	less	accepted,
are	 today	 utterly	 unbearable.	 They	 just	 stopped
working.
What	will	Happen	Next?
The	first	possibility	is	that	Putin	will	habitually
turn	 to	 his	 tried	 and	 tested	 formula.	 The
‘trasformismo’	strategy	can	last	a	very	long	time.
But	we	have	seen	that	the	liberals	will	actively
undermine	 it,	 and	 the	 patriots	 who	 are	 not
required	to	believe	in	it,	might	just	believe	that
it’s	 a	 simulacrum	 and	 a	 fake,	 and	 the	 political

authorities	 will	 not	 do	 anything	 decisive.	 That
means	that	Putin	is	seriously	risking	the	loss	of
his	real	electorate	in	the	folk,	his	strategic	reserve
—	the	trust	of	the	patriotically-minded	masses.	In
other	 words,	 the	 ‘patriotism	 plus	 liberalism’
formula	 will	 not	 work	 at	 all	 under	 the	 new
circumstances.
There	 is	 one	 option	 left:	 patriotism	 without
any	 impurities,	 such	 as	 Eurasianism	 and
conservatism	  without	  any	  simulacra	  or
postmodernism.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 logical	 and
responsible	choice	for	the	third	term.
The	programme	for	such	a	conservative	turn	is
exceedingly	clear	and	in	many	ways	natural	for
Putin	 himself.	 Most	 likely	 this	 is	 how	 he
organically	 understands	 the	 world,	 the	 country,
and	 history.	 In	 the	 past	 there	 were	 limiting
factors;	let	us	not	discuss	right	now	whether	they
were	 baseless	 or	 grounded	 in	 reality,	 but	 there
were.	Now,	there	aren’t	any.	That	is	why	all	that

remains	 is	 pure	 patriotism.	 And	 the	 gesture	 is
already	 prepared:	 the	 liberals,	 partially	 getting
ahead	 of	 themselves,	 have	 already	 irreversibly
identified	 Putin	 with	 patriotism	 and	 have
sentenced	 him	 as	 a	 patriot,	 conservative	 and
populist.	All	that	remains	is	for	Putin	to	become
the	thing	that	his	sworn	enemies	already	see	him
as	—	which	is	also	the	thing	that	his	friends	of
today,	the	patriots	and	Eurasianists,	want	to	see
him	 as.	 There	 is	 just	 one	 small	 thing	 left:	 to
firmly	 take	 ownership	 of	 the	 image	 that	 had
formed	in	the	oppositional	minority’s	mind	a	long
time	 ago	 and	 that	 would	 be	 accepted	 by	 the
popular	majority,	and	which	would	be	organic	and
natural	 for	 Putin	 himself.	 If	 it	 does,	 finally,
happen	 (and	 Putin’s	 pre-election	 articles,	 the
meeting	 of	 patriots	 on	 Poklonnaya	 Hill,	 the
founding	of	the	Izborsk	Club,	and	some	symbolic
cabinet	reshuffling	all	give	us	reason	to	see	it	as	a
distinct	possibility),	what	can	we	expect?

The	answer	is	simple:	at	the	age	of	60	a	new
Putin	 will	 be	 revealed	 to	 us.	 Putin	 the	 patriot,
minus	 the	 liberalism.	 Putin,	 the	 supporter	 of	 a
multipolar	world,	and	the	opponent	of	American
hegemony.	 Putin,	 Eurasian,	 the	 supporter	 of	 a
great	 continental	 empire	 and	 of	 Russian
civilisation.
A	lot	for	a	60-year-old.
Just	enough	for	a	political	leader.	And	yet...
there	is	no	room	for	error.	In	the	next	12	years	—
the	last	years	this	can	happen	—	it’s	paramount	to
win	the	battle	for	Russia	or...	(I	don’t	even	want
to	say	it	out	loud).
Then	 we	 wait	 for	 the	 following:	 real	 steps
towards	integrating	the	post-Soviet	space	and	the
creation	 of	 the	 Eurasian	 Union;	 a	 huge	 leap
forward	in	the	field	of	defence;	the	development
of	 a	 consolidating	 idea,	 aimed	 at	 strengthening
the	cultural	code	of	our	Eurasian	civilisation;	a
turn	 towards	 conservative	 values	 and	 even

traditionalism,	morality,	spirituality,	and	morality
in	the	fields	of	education,	culture,	and	in	the	mass
media;	 a	 transition	 from	 a	 liberal	 economic
policy	to	a	social	and	mobilising	one;	a	defeat	of
Western	networks	of	influence	over	the	elite,	the
culture,	 the	 community	 of	 experts,	 and	 the
government;	a	reorganisation	of	the	structure	of
inter-ethnic	relationships	based	on	the	principles
of	respect	for	the	Russian	nation	while	taking	into
account	 the	 interests	 of	 all	 ethnic	 and
confessional	groups;	emphasis	on	the	renewal	of
the	 political	 and	 governing	 elite	 with	 new,
passionary	 personnel;	 leaning	 on	 advanced
technologies	and	the	real	economic	sector	while
overcoming	  resource	  dependency;	  stricter
measures	against	corruption	tied	to	transnational
institutions	and	which	are	part	of	the	systems	of
external	governance;	the	authorities	siding	with
the	people	(the	wide	Russian,	Eurasian	masses)
and	selecting	new	active	and	passionate	personnel

from	 the	 bottom	 into	 the	 governing	 elite;	 and
accepting	 a	 singular	 orientation	 towards
multipolarity,	  polycentrism	  and	  effective
resistance	 to	 American	 hegemony	 in	 foreign
policy.
Can	 this	 be	 accomplished	 while	 maintaining
the	inertial	order	of	things	in	today’s	Russia?	Can
it	 be	 done	 with	 the	 current	 personnel	 and	 the
rather	 relaxed	 psychological	 state	 of	 society,
which	 is	 mostly	 preoccupied	 with	 simple
survival?
I	will	respond	paradoxically	and	unexpectedly
that	yes,	it	can.	The	thing	is,	Russia	is	politically
structured	on	the	principle	of	vertical	symmetry.
The	one	at	the	top	is	everything.	Furthermore,	the
higher	 up	 and	 more	 authoritarian	 the	 ruler,	 the
closer	he	is	to	the	masses	and	the	more	stable	his
rule.	The	elites,	who	break	up	the	society	from	the
top	and	the	bottom,	always	oppose	the	ruler	and
the	people	alike.	If	the	ruler	makes	a	single	move

specifically	looking	to	lean	on	the	wide	popular
masses,	 he	 gains	 unlimited	 possibilities,	 and
doesn’t	have	to	account	to	anyone	after	that.	Call
it	what	you	will.	It’s	Russian;	it	was	and	most
likely	 will	 be.	 Due	 to	 this	 feature	 of	 Russian
society	 an	 autocratic	 ruler	 can	 carry	 out	 any
reforms,	or	none	at	all.
So,	if	Putin	makes	a	decision	at	the	age	of	60,
it	alone	will	be	enough.	Personnel	will	appear,	the
psychological	 state	 will	 change,	 energy	 will
appear	along	with	resources,	and	the	inertia	will
disappear.	This	doesn’t	mean	that	everything	will
go	smoothly:	one	must	not	underestimate	the	pro-
Western	 elites	 and	 especially	 their	 American
patrons.	 But	 there	 are	 very	 real	 chances	 for
success.	So,	it	appears	that	whether	or	not	the	60-
year-old	 President	 wants	 to	 or	 not,	 he	 has	 to
choose	one	thing:	patriotism.	And	that’s	it.
This	 is	 not	 an	 ultimatum	 or	 a	 self-fulfilling
prophecy.	It’s	nothing	personal.	Such	is	the	logic

of	cycles	in	politics,	ideology	and	the	electoral
process,	as	well	as	in	the	personal	biography	of	a
major	politician.	It	is	cold	math	that	is	this	time
giving	all	of	us	hope	and	giving	us	a	chance.
When	Putin	was	48	and	he	had	just	emerged	on
the	 horizon	 of	 Russian	 politics,	 I	 expressed
genuine	enthusiasm	for	his	authentic	actions	(the
second	Chechen	campaign,	hitting	the	oligarchy,
stopping	the	flow	of	radical	Russophobia	in	the
media;	 in	 other	 words,	 the	 liquidation	 of
Yeltsinism)	and	his	clear	declarations	(accepting
sovereignty	 as	 the	 highest	 value,	 multipolarity,
and	orientation	towards	the	Eurasian	Union).	This
was	reflected	in	my	text	‘Dawn	in	Boots’.	Time
has	 shown	 that	 I	 was	 clearly	 getting	 ahead	 of
myself.	Ahead	 were	 12	 years	 of	 delay,	 wasted
time,	 and	 empty	 political	 tricks.	 It	 was	 a
simulacrum	 of	 dawn.	 In	 other	 words,	 12	 years
were	 stolen	 from	 the	 country,	 from	 history,
politics,	 Eurasianism,	 and	 from	 me	 personally.

It’s	 impossible	 to	 just	 forget	 that.	 The	 former
trust	 has	 been	 compromised.	 The	 emotions	 are
gone.	 To	 some	 extent	 or	 other,	 the	 patriotic
majority	feels	the	same.	It	may	not	say	so,	and
may	not	be	able	to	express	it,	but	it	feels	it.
That’s	why	it	is	possible	today	to	say	without
irritation	   or	   hopefulness:	   ‘Vladimir
Vladimirovitch,	this	is	your	last	chance.’
And	 also	 our	 last	 chance,	 because	 if	 they
topple	Putin,	the	country	will	go	down	with	him.
The	final	gesture	is	on	the	agenda:	a	radical
transformation	of	the	formula,	minus	liberalism.
There	is	no	more	time	to	warm	up.	None.	Now	or
never.	One’s	sixtieth	birthday	doesn’t	allow	for
words	like	‘later’	or	‘gradually’.

Appendix	I:The	War	on
Russia	in	Its	Ideological
Dimension	—	An
Analysis	from	the
Perspective	of	the	Fourth
Political	Theory
(April	2014)
The	Coming	War	as	Concept
The	 war	 against	 Russia	 is	 currently	 the	 most
discussed	issue	in	the	West.	At	this	 point	 it	 is
only	 a	 suggestion	 and	 a	 possibility,	 but	 it	 can
become	a	reality	depending	on	the	decisions	taken
by	all	parties	involved	in	the	Ukrainian	conflict
—	Moscow,	Washington,	Kiev,	and	Brussels.

I	 don’t	 want	 to	 discuss	 all	 the	 aspects	 and
history	of	this	conflict	here.	Instead	I	propose	to
analyze	its	deep	ideological	roots.	My	conception
of	the	most	relevant	events	is	based	on	the	Fourth
Political	 Theory,	 whose	 principles	 I	 have
described	in	my	book	under	the	same	name	that
was	 published	 in	 English	 by	 Arktos	 Media	 in
2012.
Therefore	I	will	not	examine	the	war	of	the
West	 on	 Russia	 in	 terms	 of	 its	 risks,	 dangers,
issues,	 costs	 or	 consequences,	 but	 rather	 in	 an
ideological	 sense	 as	 seen	 from	 the	 global
perspective.	I	will	instead	meditate	on	the	sense
of	such	a	war,	and	not	on	the	war	itself	(which
may	be	either	real	or	virtual).
Essence	of	Liberalism
In	the	modern	West,	there	is	one	ruling,	dominant
ideology:	 liberalism.	 It	 may	 appear	 in	 many
shades,	 versions	 and	 forms,	 but	 the	 essence	 is

always	 the	 same.	 Liberalism	 contains	 an	 inner,
fundamental	 structure	 which	 follows	 axiomatic
principles:
■		anthropological	individualism	(the	individual
is	the	measure	of	all	things);
■		belief	in	progress	(the	world	is	heading	toward
a	better	future,	and	the	past	is	always	worse
than	the	present);
■		technocracy	 (technical	 development	 and	 its
execution	 are	 taken	 as	 the	 most	 important
criteria	 by	 which	 to	 judge	 the	 nature	 of	 a
society);
■		Eurocentrism	 (Euro-American	 societies	 are
accepted	as	the	standard	of	measure	for	the	rest
of	humanity);
■		economy	as	destiny	(the	free	market	economy
is	the	only	normative	economic	system	—	all
the	 other	 types	 are	 to	 either	 be	 reformed	 or
destroyed);
■		democracy	is	the	rule	of	minorities	(defending

themselves	from	the	majority,	which	is	always
prone	 to	 degenerate	 into	 totalitarianism	 or
‘populism’);
■		the	middle	class	is	the	only	really	existing
social	actor	and	universal	norm	(independent
from	the	fact	of	whether	or	not	an	individual
has	already	reached	this	status	or	is	on	the	way
to	  becoming	  actually	  middle	  class,
representing	for	the	moment	only	a	would-be
middle	class);
■		one-world	 globalism	 (human	 beings	 are	 all
essentially	the	same	with	only	one	distinction,
namely	that	of	their	individual	nature	—	the
world	should	be	integrated	on	the	basis	of	the
individual	and	cosmopolitism;	in	other	words,
world	citizenship).
These	are	the	core	values	of	liberalism,	and	they
are	a	manifestation	of	one	of	the	three	tendencies
that	 originated	 in	 the	 Enlightenment	 alongside
Communism	 and	 fascism,	 which	 collectively

proposed	varying	interpretations	of	the	spirit	of
modernity.	 During	 the	 twentieth	 century,
liberalism	defeated	its	rivals,	and	since	1991	has
become	the	sole,	dominant	ideology	of	the	world.
The	only	freedom	of	choice	in	the	kingdom	of
global	liberalism	is	that	between	Right	liberalism,
Left	 liberalism	 or	 radical	 liberalism,	 including
far-Right	 liberalism,	 far-Left	 liberalism	 and
extremely	radical	liberalism.	As	a	consequence,
liberalism	 has	 been	 installed	 as	 the	 operational
system	 of	 Western	 civilisation	 and	 of	 all	 other
societies	 that	 find	 themselves	 in	 the	 zone	 of
Western	 influence.	 It	 has	 become	 the	 common
denominator	for	any	politically	correct	discourse,
and	 the	 distinguishing	 mark	 which	 determines
who	is	accepted	by	mainstream	politics	and	who
is	 marginalised	 and	 rejected.	 Conventional
wisdom	itself	became	liberal.
Geopolitically,	liberalism	was	inscribed	in	the
America-centred	 model	 in	 which	Anglo-Saxons

formed	 the	 ethnical	 core,	 based	 upon	 the
Atlanticist	 Euro-American	 partnership,	 NATO,
which	represents	the	strategic	core	of	the	system
of	global	security.	Global	security	has	come	to	be
seen	as	being	synonymous	with	the	security	of	the
West,	 and	 in	 the	 last	 instance	 with	 American
security.	So	liberalism	is	not	only	an	ideological
power	but	also	a	political,	military	and	strategic
power.	 NATO	 is	 liberal	 in	 its	 roots.	 It	 defends
liberal	societies,	and	it	fights	to	extend	liberalism
to	new	areas.
Liberalism	as	Nihilism
There	 is	 one	 point	 in	 liberal	 ideology	 that	 has
brought	 about	 a	 crisis	 within	 it:	 liberalism	 is
profoundly	nihilistic	at	its	core.	The	set	of	values
defended	by	liberalism	is	essentially	linked	to	its
main	thesis:	the	primacy	of	liberty.	But	liberty	in
the	 liberal	 vision	 is	 an	 essentially	negative
category:	it	claims	to	be	free	from	(as	per	John

Stuart	Mill),	not	to	be	free	for	something.	It	is	not
secondary;	it	is	the	essence	of	the	problem.
Liberalism	 fights	 against	 all	 forms	 of
collective	identity,	and	against	all	types	of	values,
projects,	strategies,	goals,	methods	and	so	on	that
are	collectivist,	or	at	least	non-individualist.	That
is	 the	 reason	 why	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important
theorists	of	liberalism,	Karl	Popper
[384]
	(following
Friedrich	Hayek),	held	in	his	important	book,	The
Open	 Society	 and	 Its	 Enemies,
[385]
	 that	 liberals
should	 fight	 against	 any	 ideology	 or	 political
philosophy	(ranging	from	Plato	and	Aristotle	to
Marx	and	Hegel)	that	suggests	that	human	society
should	have	some	common	goal,	common	value,
or	 common	 meaning.	 (It	 should	 be	 noted	 that
George	Soros	regards	this	book	as	his	personal
bible.)	Any	goal,	any	value,	and	any	meaning	in
liberal	 society,	 or	 the	 open	 society,	 should	 be
strictly	based	upon	the	individual.	So	the	enemies
of	the	open	society,	which	is	synonymous	with

Western	 society	 post-1991,	 and	 which	 has
become	the	norm	for	the	rest	of	the	world,	are
concrete.	 Its	 primary	 enemies	 are	 Communism
and	fascism,	both	ideologies	which	emerged	from
the	 same	 Enlightenment	 philosophy,	 and	 which
contained	central,	non-individualistic	concepts	—
class	in	Marxism,	race	in	National	Socialism,	and
the	national	state	in	fascism).
The	 source	 of	 liberalism’s	 conflict	 with	 the
existing	 alternatives	 of	 modernity,	 fascism	 or
Communism	is	quite	obvious.	Liberals	claim	to
liberate	society	from	fascism	and	Communism,	or
from	 the	 two	 major	 permutations	 of	 explicitly
non-individualistic	  modern	  totalitarianism.
Liberalism’s	struggle,	when	viewed	as	a	part	of
the	 process	 of	 the	 liquidation	 of	 non-liberal
societies,	 is	 quite	 meaningful:	 it	 acquires	 its
meaning	from	the	fact	of	the	very	existence	of
ideologies	that	explicitly	deny	the	individual	as
society’s	highest	value.	It	is	quite	clear	what	the

struggle	is	attempting	to	achieve:	liberation	from
its	 opposite.	 But	 the	 fact	 that	 liberty,	 as	 it	 is
conceived	 by	 liberals,	 is	 an	 essentially	negative
category	is	not	clearly	perceived	here.	The	enemy
is	present	and	is	concrete.	That	very	fact	gives
liberalism	its	solid	content.	Something	other	than
the	 open	 society	 exists,	 and	 the	 fact	 of	 its
existence	 is	 enough	 to	 justify	 the	 process	 of
liberation.
Unipolar	Period:	Threat	of	Implosion
In	 1991,	 when	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 as	 the	 last
opponent	 of	 Western	 liberalism	 fell,	 some
Westerners,	  such	  as	  Francis	  Fukuyama,
proclaimed	 the	 end	 of	 history.	 This	 was	 quite
logical:	as	there	was	no	longer	an	explicit	enemy
of	the	open	society,	therefore	there	was	no	more
history	as	had	occurred	during	the	modern	period,
which	was	defined	by	the	struggle	between	three
political	ideologies	(liberalism,	Communism	and

fascism)	 for	 the	 heritage	 of	 the	 Enlightenment.
That	 was,	 strategically	 speaking,	 the	 moment
when	 the	 ‘unipolar	 moment’	 was	 realized
(Charles	Krauthammer).	The	period	between	1991
and	2014,	at	the	midpoint	of	which	Bin	Laden’s
attack	against	the	World	Trade	Center	occurred,
was	 the	 period	 of	 the	 global	 domination	 of
liberalism.	 The	 axioms	 of	 liberalism	 were
accepted	 by	 all	 the	 main	 geopolitical	 actors,
including	China	(in	economic	terms)	and	Russia
(in	its	ideology,	economy,	and	political	system).
There	were	liberals	and	would-be	liberals,	not-yet
liberals,	 not-liberal-enough	 liberals	 and	 so	 on.
The	real	and	explicit	exceptions	were	few	(such
as	Iran	and	North	Korea),	so	the	world	became
axiomatically	liberal	according	to	its	ideology.
This	has	been	the	most	important	moment	in
the	 history	 of	 liberalism.	 It	 has	 defeated	 its
enemies,	but	at	the	same	time	it	has	lost	them.
Liberalism	is	essentially	the	liberation	from	and

the	fight	against	all	that	is	not	liberal	(at	present
or	 in	 what	 has	 the	 potential	 to	 become	 such).
Liberalism	 acquired	 its	 real	 meaning	 and	 its
content	 from	 its	 enemies.	 When	 the	 choice	 is
presented	 as	 being	 between	 not-freedom	 (as
represented	by	concrete	totalitarian	societies)	or
freedom,	  many	  choose	  freedom,	  not
understanding	it	in	terms	of	freedom	for	what,	or
freedom	to	do	what...	When	there	is	an	illiberal
society,	liberalism	is	positive.	It	only	begins	to
show	its	negative	essence	after	victory.
After	the	victory	of	1991,	liberalism	stepped
into	 its	implosive	 phase.	After	 having	 defeated
Communism	and	fascism,	it	stood	alone,	with	no
enemy	to	fight.	And	that	was	the	moment	when
inner	 conflicts	 emerged,	 when	 liberal	 societies
began	to	attempt	to	purge	themselves	of	their	last
remaining	non-liberal	elements:	sexism,	political
incorrectness,	inequality	between	the	sexes,	any
remnants	of	the	non-individualistic	dimensions	of

institutions	such	as	the	state	and	the	Church,	and
so	 on.	Liberalism	 always	 needs	 an	 enemy	 to
liberate	from.	Otherwise	it	loses	its	purpose,	and
its	 implicit	 nihilism	 becomes	 too	 salient.	 The
absolute	triumph	of	liberalism	is	its	death.
That	 is	 the	 ideological	 meaning	 of	 the
financial	crises	of	2000	and	2008.	The	successes
and	not	the	failures	of	the	new,	entirely	profit-
based	economy	(of	turbo-capitalism,	according	to
Edward	 Luttwak)
[386]
	 are	 responsible	 for	 its
collapse.
The	 liberty	 to	 do	 anything	 you	 want,	 but
restricted	 to	 the	 individual	 scale,	 provokes	 an
implosion	of	the	personality.	The	human	passes	to
the	 infra-human	 realm,	 and	 to	 sub-individual
domains.	And	here	he	encounters	virtuality,	as	a
dream	 of	 sub-individuality,	 the	 freedom	 from
anything.	This	is	the	evaporation	of	the	human,
and	brings	about	the	Empire	of	nothingness	as	the
last	 word	 in	 the	 total	 victory	 of	 liberalism.

Postmodernism	prepares	the	terrain	for	that	post-
historic,	self-referential	recycling	of	non-sense.
The	West	is	in	Need	of	an	Enemy
You	may	ask	now,	what	the	Hell	does	all	of	this
have	 to	 do	 with	 the	 (presumable)	 coming	 war
with	Russia?	I	am	ready	to	answer	that	now.
Liberalism	has	continued	to	gain	momentum
on	 a	 global	 scale.	 Since	 1991,	 it	 has	 been	 an
inescapable	 fact.	 And	 it	 has	 now	begun	 to
implode.	It	has	arrived	at	its	terminal	point	and
started	to	liquidate	itself.	Mass	immigration,	the
clash	of	cultures	and	civilisations,	the	financial
crisis,	 terrorism,	 and	 the	 growth	 of	 ethnic
nationalism	are	indicators	of	approaching	chaos.
This	chaos	endangers	the	established	order:	any
kind	of	order,	including	the	liberal	order	itself.
The	 more	 liberalism	 succeeds,	 the	 faster	 it
approaches	 its	 end	 and	 the	 end	 of	 the	 present
world.	 Here	 we	 are	 dealing	 with	 the	 nihilistic

essence	of	liberal	philosophy,	with	nothingness	as
the	inner	(me)ontological	principle	of	freedom-
from.	 The	 German	 anthropologist	 Arnold
Gehlen
[387]
	 justly	 defined	 the	 human	 as	 a
‘deprived	 being’,	 or	Mangelwesen.	 Man	 in
himself	is	nothing.	He	takes	all	that	comprises	his
identity	 from	 society,	 history,	 people,	 and
politics.	So	if	he	returns	to	his	pure	essence,	he
can	no	longer	recognise	anything.	The	abyss	is
hidden	behind	the	fragmented	debris	of	feelings,
vague	thoughts,	and	dim	desires.	The	virtuality	of
sub-human	emotions	is	a	thin	veil;	behind	it	there
is	pure	darkness.	So	the	explicit	discovery	of	this
nihilistic	 basis	 of	 human	 nature	 is	 the	 last
achievement	 of	 liberalism.	 But	 that	 is	 the	 end,
and	the	end	also	for	those	who	use	liberalism	for
their	own	purposes	and	who	are	beneficiaries	of
liberal	expansion;	in	other	words,	the	masters	of
globalisation.	Any	and	all	order	collapses	in	such
an	emergency	of	nihilism:	the	liberal	order,	too.

In	order	to	rescue	the	rule	of	this	liberal	elite,
they	need	to	take	a	certain	step	back.	Liberalism
will	 reacquire	 its	 meaning	 only	 when	 it	 is
confronted	 once	 more	 with	non-liberal	 society.
This	 step	 back	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 save	 what
remains	 of	 order,	 and	 to	 save	 liberalism	 from
itself.	 Therefore,	 Putin’s	 Russia	 appears	 on	 its
horizon.	 Modern	 Russia	 is	 not	 anti-liberal,	 not
totalitarian,	not	nationalist,	and	not	Communist,
nor	 is	 it	 yet	 too	 liberal,	 fully	 liberal-democrat,
sufficiently	 cosmopolite,	 or	 so	 radically	 anti-
Communist.	It	is	rather	on	the	way	to	becoming
liberal,	 step	 by	 step,	 within	 the	 process	 of	 a
Gramscian	 adjustment	 to	 global	 hegemony	 and
the	 subsequent	 transformation	 this	 entails
(trasformismo	in	Gramscian	language).
However,	in	the	global	agenda	of	liberalism	as
represented	by	the	United	States	and	NATO,	there
is	a	need	for	another	actor,	for	another	Russia	that
would	justify	the	order	of	the	liberal	camp,	and	to

help	mobilise	the	West	as	it	threatens	to	break
apart	 from	 inner	 strife.	 This	 will	 delay	 the
irruption	of	liberalism’s	inner	nihilism	and	thus
save	it	from	its	inevitable	end.	That	is	why	they
badly	need	Putin,	Russia,	and	war.	It	is	the	only
way	to	prevent	chaos	in	the	West	and	to	save	what
remains	of	its	global	and	domestic	order.	In	this
ideological	  play,	  Russia	  would	  justify
liberalism’s	existence,	because	that	is	the	enemy
which	would	give	a	meaning	to	the	struggle	of	the
open	 society,	 and	 which	 would	 help	 it	 to
consolidate	and	continue	to	affirm	itself	globally.
Radical	Islam,	such	as	represented	by	Al	Qaeda,
was	another	candidate	for	this	role,	but	it	lacked
sufficient	stature	to	become	a	real	enemy.	It	was
used,	but	only	on	a	local	scale.	 It	 justified	 the
intervention	 in	 Afghanistan,	 the	 occupation	 of
Iraq,	the	overthrow	of	Gaddafi,	and	started	a	civil
war	 in	 Syria,	 but	 it	 was	 too	 weak	 and
ideologically	 primitive	 to	 represent	 the	 real

challenge	that	is	needed	by	liberals.
Russia,	 the	 traditional	 geopolitical	 enemy	 of
Anglo-Saxons,	 is	 much	 more	 serious	 as	 an
opponent.	It	fits	the	needed	role	extremely	well
—	the	memory	of	the	Cold	War	is	still	fresh	in
many	minds.	Hate	for	Russia	is	an	easy	thing	to
provoke	by	relatively	simple	means.	This	is	why	I
think	 that	 war	 with	 Russia	 is	 possible.	 It	 is
ideologically	 necessary	 as	 the	 last	 means	 to
postpone	the	final	implosion	of	the	liberal	West.
It	is	the	needed	‘one	step	back’.
To	Save	the	Liberal	Order
Considering	the	different	layers	of	this	concept	of
a	possible	war	with	Russia,	I	suggest	a	few	points:
A	 war	 with	 Russia	 will	 help	 to	 delay	 the
coming	disorder	on	a	global	scale.	The	majority
of	the	countries	that	are	involved	in	the	liberal
economy,	 and	 which	 share	 the	 axioms	 and
institutions	of	liberal	democracy,	and	which	are

either	dependent	upon	or	directly	 controlled	 by
the	United	States	and	NATO,	will	forge	a	common
front	once	more	behind	the	cause	of	the	liberal
West	in	its	quest	to	oppose	the	anti-liberal	Putin.
This	will	serve	to	reaffirm	liberalism	as	a	positive
identity	 when	 this	 identity	 is	 beginning	 to
dissolve	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the	 manifestation	 of	 its
nihilistic	essence.
A	 war	 with	 Russia	 would	 strengthen	 NATO
and	above	all	its	European	members,	who	will	be
obliged	 once	 more	 to	 regard	 American
hyperpower	as	something	positive	and	useful,	and
the	 old	 Cold	 War	 stance	 will	 no	 longer	 seem
obsolete.	Out	of	a	fear	of	the	coming	of	the	‘evil
Russians’,	Europeans	will	again	feel	loyal	to	the
United	States	as	their	protector	and	savior.	As	a
result,	the	leading	role	of	the	US	in	NATO	will	be
reaffirmed.
The	 EU	 is	 falling	 apart.	 The	 supposed
‘common	threat’	of	the	Russians	could	prevent	it

from	an	eventual	split,	mobilising	these	societies
and	 making	 their	 peoples	 once	 again	 eager	 to
defend	their	liberties	and	values	under	the	threat
of	Putin’s	‘imperial	ambitions’.
The	Ukraine	junta	in	Kiev	needs	this	war	to
justify	and	conceal	all	the	misdeeds	they	carried
out	 during	 the	 Maidan	 protests	 on	 both	 the
juridical	and	constitutional	levels,	thus	allowing
them	 to	suspend	democracy	 that	 would	 impede
their	rule	in	the	southeastern,	mostly	pro-Russian
districts	and	would	enable	them	to	establish	their
authority	 and	 nationalistic	 order	 through	 extra-
parliamentary	means.
The	only	country	that	doesn’t	want	war	now	is
Russia.	 But	 Putin	 cannot	 let	 the	 radically	 anti-
Russian	 government	 in	 Ukraine	 dominate	 a
country	that	has	a	population	that	is	half-Russian
and	which	contains	many	pro-Russian	regions.	If
he	 allows	 this,	 he	 will	 be	 finished	 on	 the
international	and	domestic	levels.	So,	reluctantly,

he	 accepts	 war.	 And	 once	 he	 begins	 on	 this
course,	there	will	be	no	other	solution	for	Russia
but	to	win	it.
I	don’t	like	to	speculate	regarding	the	strategic
aspects	of	this	coming	war.	I	leave	that	to	other,
more	qualified	analysts.	Instead	I	would	like	to
formulate	some	ideas	concerning	the	ideological
dimension	of	this	war.
Framing	Putin
The	meaning	of	this	war	on	Russia	is	in	essence
the	last	effort	of	globalist	liberalism	to	save	itself
from	implosion.	As	such,	liberals	need	to	define
Putin’s	 Russia	 ideologically	 —	 and	 obviously
identify	it	with	the	enemy	of	the	open	society.	But
in	the	dictionary	of	modern	ideologies	there	are
only	 three	 primary	 iterations:	 liberalism,
Communism	 and	 fascism.	 It	 is	 quite	 clear	 that
liberalism	 is	 represented	 by	 all	 the	 nations
involved	 in	 this	 conflict	 except	 for	 Russia	 (the

United	 States,	 the	 NATO	 member	 states,	 and
Euromaidan/the	 Kiev	 junta).	 This	 leaves	 only
Communism	 and	 fascism.	 Therefore	 Putin	 is
made	out	to	be	a	‘neo-Soviet	revanchist’	and	a
‘return	of	the	KGB’.	This	is	the	picture	that	is
being	 sold	 to	 the	 most	 stupid	 sort	 of	 Western
public.	But	some	aspects	of	the	patriotic	reaction
emanating	 from	 the	 pro-Russian	 and	 anti-
Banderite	population	of	Ukraine	(i.e.,	the	defense
of	 Lenin’s	 monuments,	 portraits	 of	 Stalin	 and
memorials	 to	 the	 Soviet	 involvement	 in	 the
Second	World	War)	could	confirm	this	idea	in	the
minds	of	this	public.	Nazism	and	fascism	are	too
far	removed	from	Putin	and	the	reality	of	modern
Russia,	 but	 Russian	 nationalism	 and	 Russian
imperialism	will	be	evoked	within	the	image	of
the	 Great	 Evil	 that	 is	 being	 drawn.	 Therefore
Putin	 is	 being	 made	 out	 to	 be	 a	 ‘radical
nationalist’,	a	‘fascist’	and	an	‘imperialist’.	This
will	work	on	many	Westerners.	Under	this	logic,

Putin	can	be	both	Communist	and	fascist	at	the
same	time,	so	he	will	be	depicted	as	a	National
Bolshevik	 (although	 this	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 too
complicated	for	the	postmodern	Western	public).
It	is	obvious	that	in	reality,	Putin	is	neither	—	he
is	 not	 a	 Communist	 nor	 a	 fascist,	 nor	 both
simultaneously.	He	is	a	political	pragmatist	in	the
realm	of	international	relations	—	this	is	why	he
admires	Kissinger,	and	why	Kissinger	likes	him
in	return.	He	has	no	ideology	whatsoever.	But	he
will	be	obliged	to	embrace	the	ideological	frame
that	he	has	been	assigned.	It	is	not	his	choice.	But
such	are	the	rules	of	the	game.	In	the	course	of
this	war	on	Russia,	Putin	will	be	framed	in	this
way,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 most	 interesting	 and
important	aspect	of	this	situation.
The	main	idea	that	liberals	will	try	to	advance
to	 define	 Putin	 ideologically	 will	 be	 as	 the
shadow	 of	 the	 past,	 as	 a	 vampire:	 ‘Sometimes
they	come	back.’	That	is	the	rationale	behind	this

attempt	 to	 prevent	 the	 final	 implosion	 of
liberalism.	 The	 primary	 message	 is	 that
liberalism	is	still	alive	and	vital	because	there	is
something	 in	 the	 world	 that	 we	 all	 must	 be
liberated	 from.	 Russia	 will	 become	 the	object
from	which	it	must	be	liberated.	The	goal	is	first
to	liberate	Ukraine,	and	by	extension	Europe	and
the	 rest	 of	 humanity,	 who	 will	 likewise	 be
depicted	as	being	under	threat	from	Russia,	and	in
the	end	Russia	itself	will	be	said	to	be	in	need	of
rescue	from	its	own	non-liberal	identity.	So	now
we	 have	 an	 enemy.	 Such	 an	 enemy	 once	 more
gives	 liberalism	 its	raison	d’être.	 So	 Russia	 is
being	made	out	to	be	a	challenger	from	the	pre-
liberal	 past	 thrown	 into	 the	 liberal	 present.
Without	such	a	challenge	there	is	no	more	life	in
liberalism,	 no	 more	 order	 in	 the	 world,	 and
everything	associated	with	them	will	dissolve	and
implode.	With	this	challenge,	the	falling	giant	of
globalism	acquires	new	vigour.	Russia	is	here	to

save	the	liberals.	
But	in	order	for	this	to	happen,	Russia	is	being
framed	 ideologically	 as	 something	 pre-liberal.
She	must	be	either	Communist,	fascist	or	perhaps
National	Bolshevist.	That	is	the	ideological	rule.
Therefore,	 in	 fighting	 with	 Russia,	 or	 in
considering	to	fight	her,	or	in	not	fighting	her,
there	 is	 a	 deeper	 task	 —	to	 frame	 Russia
ideologically.	It	will	be	done	from	both	the	inside
and	the	outside.	They	will	try	to	force	Russia	to
accept	  either	  Communism	  or	  extreme
nationalism,	or	else	they	will	simply	treat	Russia
as	if	it	were	these	things.	It	is	a	framing	game.
Post-liberal	Russia:	The	First	War	of	the	Fourth
Political	Theory
In	conclusion,	what	I	propose	is	the	following:
We	 need	 to	 consciously	 counter	 any
provocation	 to	 frame	 Russia	 as	 a	pre-liberal
power.	We	need	to	refuse	to	allow	the	liberals	to

save	themselves	from	their	fast-approaching	end.
Rather	than	helping	them	to	delay	it,	we	need	to
accelerate	 it.	 In	 order	 to	 do	 this,	 we	 need	 to
present	Russia	not	as	a	pre-liberal	entity	but	as	a
post-liberal	revolutionary	force	that	struggles	for
an	 alternative	 future	 for	 all	 the	 peoples	 of	 the
planet.	 The	 Russian	 war	 will	 not	 only	 be	 for
Russian	national	interests,	but	will	be	in	the	cause
of	a	just	multipolar	world,	for	real	dignity	and	for
real,	positive	freedom	—	not	(nihilistic)	freedom
from	but	freedom	for.	In	this	war,	Russia	will	set
an	 example	 as	 the	 defender	 of	 Tradition,
conservative	 organic	 values,	 and	 will	 represent
real	 liberation	 from	 the	 open	 society	 and	 its
beneficiaries	 —	 the	 global	 financial	 oligarchy.
This	war	is	not	against	Ukrainians	or	even	against
part	of	the	Ukrainian	populace.	Nor	is	it	against
Europe.	It	is	against	the	liberal	world	(dis)order.
We	 are	 not	 going	 to	 save	 liberalism,	 per	 their
designs.	We	are	going	to	kill	it	once	and	for	all.

Modernity	was	always	essentially	wrong,	and	we
are	now	at	the	terminal	point	of	modernity.	For
those	 who	 rendered	 modernity	 and	 their	 own
destiny	 synonymous,	 or	 who	 let	 that	 occur
unconsciously,	 this	 will	 mean	 the	end.	 But	 for
those	who	are	on	the	side	of	eternal	truth	and	of
Tradition,	 of	 faith,	 and	 of	 the	 spiritual	 and
immortal	 human	 essence,	 it	 will	 be	 a	new
beginning,	an	Absolute	Beginning.
The	most	important	fight	at	present	is	the	fight
for	the	Fourth	Political	Theory.	It	is	our	weapon,
and	with	it	we	are	going	to	prevent	the	liberals
from	 realising	 their	 wish	 of	 framing	 Putin	 and
Russia	in	their	own	manner,	and	in	so	doing	we
will	 reaffirm	 Russia	 as	 the	first	 post-liberal
ideological	 power	 struggling	 against	 nihilistic
liberalism	for	the	sake	of	an	open,	multipolar	and
genuinely	free	future.

Appendix	II:	Some
Suggestions	Regarding
the	Prospects	for	the
Fourth	Political	Theory
in	Europe
To	get	to	the	Fourth	Political	Theory,	we	must
begin	from	three	ideological	points.
From	Liberalism	to	the	Fourth	Political
Theory:	The	Hardest	Road
To	proceed	from	liberalism	to	the	Fourth	Political
Theory	is	the	most	difficult	path,	since	it	is	the
opposite	of	all	forms	of	liberalism.	Liberalism	is
the	essence	of	modernity,	but	the	Fourth	Political
Theory	 considers	 modernity	 to	 be	 an	 absolute
evil.	 Liberalism,	 which	 takes	 as	 its	 primary

subject	 the	 individual	 and	 all	 the	 values	 and
agendas	 that	 proceed	 from	 it,	 is	 viewed	 as	 the
enemy.	To	embrace	the	Fourth	Political	Theory
(4PT),	a	liberal	should	deny	himself	ideologically
and	reject	liberalism	and	its	suppositions	in	their
entirety.
The	liberal	is	an	individualist.	He	is	dangerous
only	when	he	is	an	extrovert,	since	in	doing	so	he
destroys	his	community	and	the	social	bonds	with
which	 he	 is	 associated.	 Being	 an	 introverted
liberal	is	less	dangerous	because	he	only	destroys
himself,	and	this	is	a	good	thing:	one	liberal	less.
But	 there	 is	 one	 interesting	 fact:	 the	 4PT
diverges	 from	 the	 modern	 versions	 of	 anti-
liberalism	 (namely,	 socialism	 and	 fascism)	 by
proposing	 not	 a	 critique	 of	 the	 individual	 as
viewed	from	the	outside,	but	rather	his	implosion.
This	means	not	to	take	a	step	back	into	pre-liberal
forms	of	society,	or	one	step	sideways	into	the
illiberal	types	of	modernity,	but	rather	one	step

inside	 the	 nihilistic	 nature	 of	 the	 individual	 as
constructed	by	liberalism.	Therefore,	the	liberal
discovers	his	way	to	the	4PT	when	he	takes	one
step	further	and	achieves	self-affirmation	as	the
unique	and	ultimate	instance	of	being.		This	is	the
final	consequence	of	the	most	radical	solipsism,
and	can	lead	to	an	implosion	of	the	ego	and	the
appearance	of	the	real	Self	(which	is	also	the	goal
of	 the	 practices	 associated	 with	 Advaita
Vedanta).
[388]
Nietzsche	 called	 his	Übermensch	‘the	winner
of	 God	 and	 nothing’.	 By	 this	 he	 meant	 the
overcoming	 of	 the	 old	 values	 of	 Tradition,	 but
also	 the	 nothingness	 that	 comes	 in	 their	 place.
Liberalism	has	accomplished	the	overcoming	of
God	and	the	victory	of	pure	nothingness.	But	this
is	the	midnight	before	the	breaking	of	dawn,	so
taking	 one	 step	 further	 into	 the	 midnight	 of
European	nihilism	is	how	a	liberal	who	wishes	to
leave	this	identity,	which	is	more	consistent	with

a	peculiarly	Western	destiny	of	decline	(because
the	 Occident	 itself	 is	 nothing	 but	 decline	 at
present	—	more	on	this	later)	behind,	arrives	at
the	horizon	of	the	4PT.
Modernity	  is	  certainly	  a	  European
phenomenon.	 But	 liberalism	 as	 the	 essence	 of
modernity	 is	 not	 so	 much	 European	 as	Anglo-
Saxon	 and	 trans-European,	 specifically	 North
American.	Europe	was	the	preliminary	stage	of
modernity,	and	thus	Europe	includes	within	itself
the	 socialist	 (Communist)	 as	 well	 as	 fascist
identities	alongside	the	purely	liberal	one.	Europe
is	the	motherland	of	all	three	political	theories.
But	America	is	a	place	where	only	one	of	them	is
deeply	 rooted	 and	 fully	 developed.	 So	 despite
being	born	in	Europe,	liberalism	has	ripened	in
America.	Europe	and	the	US	are	comparable	to
father	and	child.	The	child	inherited	only	one	of
the	 political	 possibilities	 from	 its	 father,	 albeit
the	most	important	one.	As	a	result,	liberalism	in

Europe	 is	 partly	 autochthonous	 and	 partly
imposed	by	America	(being	re-exported).	That	is
the	reason	why	American	followers	of	the	4PT	are
so	 important.	 If	 they	 manage	 to	 overcome
liberalism	 in	 the	 Far	 West,	 they	 will	 show	 the
path	 for	 European	 liberals	 to	 follow.	 This	 is
something	 akin	 to	 Julius	 Evola’s	 idea	 of
differentiated	man.	This	remark	makes	reference
to	 my	 article	 about	 the	 4PT	 in	 Europe	 and
specifically	to	the	final	two	propositions	I	make
in	it	regarding	how	to	overcome	the	individual:
by	method	of	self-transcendence	by	an	effort	of
the	 will	 (a	 kind	 of	 polytheistic	 effort	 of	 pure
will),	 or	 through	 an	 existential	 encounter	 with
death	and	absolute	loneliness.
Therefore,	the	way	from	liberalism	to	the	4PT
in	Europe	passes	through	America	and	its	inner
mystics.	This	is	the	third	attempt	to	make	sense
of	 America:	 the	 first	 one	 was	 that	 of	 de
Tocqueville,
[389]
	 the	 second	 was	 that	 of	 Jean

Baudrillard.
[390]
	The	third	one	is	reserved	for	the
European	 who	 approaches	 the	 Far	 West	 in	 a
search	for	the	mystery	of	liberalism	from	the	4PT
perspective.
From	Communism	to	the	4PT:	From
Radical	Critics	to	the	Principal	Critics
The	way	from	the	Communist	position	to	the	4PT
is	 much	 easier	 and	 shorter.	 There	 are	 some
common	points:	first	of	all,	the	radical	rejection
of	liberalism,	capitalism	and	individualism.	There
is	 a	 clear	 and	 definite	 common	 enemy.	 The
problem	 is	 that	 the	 positive	 program	 of
Communism	is	deeply	rooted	in	modernity	and
shares	 many	 typically	 modern	 notions:	 the
universality	 of	 social	 progress,	 linear	 time,
materialistic	science,	atheism,	Eurocentrism	and
so	 on.	 The	 battle	 of	 Communism	 against
capitalism	belongs	to	the	past.	But	the	4PT	is	the
main	 ideological	 opponent	 of	 liberalism	 at

present,	 so	 a	 genuine	 Communist	 can	 easily
become	attracted	to	the	4PT,	considering	its	anti-
liberal	aspects.
To	take	this	step,	one	needs	to	move	on	from
the	radical	critics	of	modernity,	such	as	Marx,	to
the	principal	critics	of	modernity,	such	as	René
Guénon,	according	to	the	excellent	formulation	of
the	French	author,	René	Alleau.
[391]
	This	brings	us
to	the	relevance	of	National	Bolshevism.	National
Bolshevism	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 hermeneutics	 that
identifies	 the	 qualitative	 features	 in	 the
quantitative	 vision	 of	 socialism.	 For	 orthodox
Marxists,	 society	 is	 based	 strictly	 on	 class
principles	and	the	socialist	community	is	formed
everywhere	according	to	one	model.	But	National
Bolsheviks,	having	analyzed	the	Soviet,	German
and	Chinese	experiences,	have	remarked	that,	put
into	 practice,	 Marxism	 can	 help	 to	 create
societies	 with	 the	 clear	 features	 of	 a	 national
culture	 and	 which	 possess	 specific	 and	 unique

identities.	   While	   being	   theoretically
internationalist,	 historical	 Communist	 societies
were	 nationalist	 with	 a	 strong	 presence	 of
traditional	aspects.	Therefore	socialism,	being	the
by-product	of	liberal	modernity,	can	be	regarded
as	an	extreme	and	heretical	kind	of	pre-modernity
and	an	eschatological	form	of	ecstatic	religiosity
—	following	the	examples	of	the	Gnostics,	the
Cathars,	Bruno,
[392]
	Müntzer
[393]
	 and	 so	 on.	 That
was	also	the	opinion	of	Eric	Voegelin,	who	called
this	the	immanentisation	of	the	eschaton.
[394]
	(This
is	 a	 heretical	 notion,	 but	 it	 is	 traditional
nevertheless.)
The	 way	 to	 the	 4PT	 for	 the	 European	 Left
passes	 through	 the	 historical	 and	 geopolitical
analyses	 of	 the	 National	 Bolsheviks	 (Ernst
Niekisch,	Ernst	Jünger	and	so	on).	Excellent	work
in	this	regard	has	been	done	by	the	European	New
Right	and	especially	by	Alain	de	Benoist.

From	the	Third	Way	to	the	4PT:	The
Shortest	Way	but	Problematic	Nevertheless
From	the	European	Third	Way	to	the	4PT	is	only
one	 step,	 because	 the	 3PT	 and	 4PT	 share	 the
Conservative	Revolution	of	the	Weimar	era	and
traditionalism	 as	 common	 starting	 points.	 But
that	step	is	not	easy	to	take.	The	4PT	is	strictly
anti-modern,	in	fact	counter-modern.	The	nation
that	is	so	dear	to	representatives	of	the	Third	Way
is	 essentially	 a	 modern	 notion,	 just	 as	 are	 the
concepts	 of	 the	 state	 and	 of	 race.	 The	 4PT	 is
against	 any	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 universalism,	 and
refuses	 Eurocentrism	 of	 any	 kind	 —	 liberal	 as
well	as	nationalist.
The	ethnic	traditions	of	the	European	peoples
are	sacred	in	their	roots	and	form	a	part	of	their
spiritual	 heritage.	 Yet	 ethnic	 identity	 is
something	quite	different	from	the	national	state
as	a	political	body.	European	history	was	always
based	on	the	plurality	of	its	cultures	and	the	unity

of	 its	 spiritual	 authorities.	 This	 was	 destroyed,
first	by	the	Protestant	Reformation	and	then	by
modernity.	The	liquidation	of	European	spiritual
unity	 was	 part	 of	 the	 origin	 of	 European
nationalism.	Therefore	the	4PT	supports	the	idea
of	a	new	European	empire	as	a	traditional	empire
with	 a	 spiritual	 foundation,	 and	 with	 the
dialectical	 coexistence	 of	 diverse	 ethic	 groups.
Instead	 of	 national	 states	 in	 Europe,	 a	 sacred
empire	—	Indo-European,	Roman	and	Greek.
This	is	the	dividing	line	between	the	European
4PT	and	the	Third	Way:	the	refusal	of	any	kind	of
nationalism,	   chauvinism,	   Eurocentrism,
universalism,	 racism,	 or	 xenophobic	 attitude.
Historic	 pretensions	 and	 hostilities	 between	 the
European	 ethnic	 groups	 existed,	 to	 be	 sure.	 It
should	 be	 recognised.	 But	 it	 is	 irresponsible	 to
construct	 a	 political	 program	 on	 that	 basis.
Europe	 should	 stand	 for	 geopolitical	 unity,
coupled	with	the	preservation	of	the	ethnic	and

cultural	 diversity	 of	 the	 various	 European
ethnoses.
The	4PT	affirms	that	geopolitics	is	the	primary
instrument	 that	 can	 be	 used	 to	 understand	 the
contemporary	 world,	 so	 Europe	 should	 be
reconstructed	 as	 an	 independent	 geopolitical
power.	All	these	points	coincide	with	the	main
principles	of	the	French	New	Right	and	with	the
manifesto	 of	 GRECE	 by	 Alain	 de	 Benoist.
[395]
Therefore	we	should	consider	the	European	New
Right	as	a	manifestation	of	the	4PT.
Here	 we	 approach	 the	 philosophy	 of	 Martin
Heidegger,	 who	 is	 central	 to	 and	 the	 most
important	thinker	for	the	4PT.	The	4PT	takes	as
its	 primary	 subject	 the	 Heideggerian	 notion	 of
Dasein.	  Heidegger	  is	  the	  metaphysical
(fundamental-ontological)	 step	 from	 the	 Third
Way	 toward	 the	 Fourth	 one.	 The	 task	 is	 to
develop	 the	 implicit	 political	 philosophy	 of
Heidegger	into	an	explicit	one,	thus	creating	as	a

consequence	a	doctrine	of	existential	politics.
Last	point.	Europe	is	the	West,	and	decline	is
its	essence.	To	come	to	the	lowest	point	of	its
descent	(Niedergang)	is	the	fate	of	Europe.	It	is
deeply	tragic,	and	not	something	one	should	be
proud	of.	So	the	4PT	is	in	favour	of	a	European
Idea	in	which	Europe	is	understood	as	a	sort	of
tragic	community	(as	per	Georges	Bataille):
[396]
	a
culture	that	is	searching	for	itself	in	the	heart	of
Hell.

Other	Books	Published	by	Arktos
The	Dharma	Manifesto
by	Sri	Dharma	Pravartaka	Acharya
Beyond	Human	Rights
by	Alain	de	Benoist
Carl	Schmitt	Today
by	Alain	de	Benoist
Manifesto	for	a	European	Renaissance
by	Alain	de	Benoist	&	Charles	Champetier
The	Problem	of	Democracy
by	Alain	de	Benoist
Germany’s	Third	Empire
by	Arthur	Moeller	van	den	Bruck
The	Arctic	Home	in	the	Vedas
by	Bal	Gangadhar	Tilak
Revolution	from	Above
by	Kerry	Bolton
The	Fourth	Political	Theory
by	Alexander	Dugin
Fascism	Viewed	from	the	Right
by	Julius	Evola
Metaphysics	of	War
by	Julius	Evola
Notes	on	the	Third	Reich

by	Julius	Evola
The	Path	of	Cinnabar
by	Julius	Evola
Archeofuturism
by	Guillaume	Faye
Convergence	of	Catastrophes
by	Guillaume	Faye
Why	We	Fight
by	Guillaume	Faye
The	WASP	Question
by	Andrew	Fraser
We	are	Generation	Identity
by	Génération	Identitaire
War	and	Denocracy
by	Paul	Gottfried
The	Saga	of	the	Aryan	Race
by	Porus	Homi	Havewala
The	Owls	of	Afrasiab
by	Lars	Holger	Holm
Homo	Maximus
by	Lars	Holger	Holm
De	Naturae	Natura
by	Alexander	Jacob
Fighting	for	the	Essence
by	Pierre	Krebs

Can	Life	Prevail?
by	Pentti	Linkola
The	Conservative
by	H.	P.	Lovecraft
The	NRA	and	the	Media
by	Brian	Anse	Patrick
The	Ten	Commandments	of	Propaganda
by	Brian	Anse	Patrick
Zombology
by	Brian	Anse	Patrick
Morning	Crafts
by	Tito	Perdue
A	Handbook	of	Traditional	Living
by	Raido
The	Agni	and	the	Ecstasy
by	Steven	J.	Rosen
The	Jedi	in	the	Lotus
by	Steven	J.	Rosen
It	Cannot	Be	Stormed
by	Ernst	von	Salomon
Tradition	&	Revolution
by	Troy	Southgate
Against	Democracy	and	Equality
by	Tomislav	Sunic
Nietzsche’s	Coming	God

by	Abir	Taha
A	Europe	of	Nations
by	Markus	Willinger
Generation	Identity
by	Markus	Willinger
The	Initiate:	Journal	of	Traditional	Studies
by	David	J.	Wingfield	(ed.)
Suprahumanism
by	Daniel	S.	Forrest
Defining	Terrorism
by	Abir	Taha
Verses	of	Light
by	Abir	Taha

[1]
		Sergei	Kovalev	(b.	1930)	was	a	former	political	prisoner	from
Soviet	times.	Following	the	collapse	of	the	Soviet	Union,	he
became	 active	 in	 politics,	 particularly	 in	 the	 promotion	 of
human	 rights	 in	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 and	 served	 as	 an
advisor	 to	 Boris	 Yeltsin.	 He	 was	 critical	 of	 the	 Russian
intervention	 in	 Chechnya	 in	 the	 1990s,	 urging	 Russian
soldiers	to	surrender	rather	than	fight.	In	recent	years	he	has
been	critical	of	the	Putin	administration.
[2]
	 	 Red-Brown	 refers	 to	 a	 political	 position	 that	 combines
elements	both	of	socialism	and	authoritarian	nationalism.
[3]
		Vladimir	Gusinsky	(b.	1952)	was	the	owner	of	many	Russian
newspapers	 and	 radio	 and	 television	 stations	 during	 the
1990s	 that	 were	 frequently	 critical	 of	 the	 Kremlin.	 After
taking	loans	from	the	gas	company	Gazprom,	he	was	unable
to	repay	them	when	Gazprom	demanded	it	in	2000,	shortly
after	Putin	took	office	and	swore	to	strip	Russia’s	oligarchs	of
their	power.	After	being	forced	to	give	up	his	media	holdings,
he	left	the	country	as	an	exile	and	constructed	a	new	media
empire	in	Israel.	A	liberal,	he	has	maintained	close	ties	with	a
number	of	American	politicians.
[4]
	 	 Grigory	Yavlinsky	 (b.	 1952)	 is	 a	 Russian	 economist	 who
devised	a	plan	in	1990,	entitled	500	Days,	that	detailed	how
Russia	 could	 transition	 from	 a	 socialist	 to	 a	 free	 market
economy	 in	 less	 than	 two	 years.	 Although	 it	 wasn’t

implemented,	Yavlinsky	has	remained	a	critic	of	the	Kremlin
from	a	liberal	perspective	ever	since.
[5]
	 	Yevgeny	 Primakov	 (b.	 1929)	 is	 a	 Russian	 politician	 who
began	his	career	in	Soviet	times.	In	2000	he	challenged	Putin
in	the	presidential	election,	but	withdrew	before	the	election
took	place.	He	then	became	an	advisor	to	and	supporter	of
Putin.
[6]
	 	Yuri	 Luzhkov	 (b.	 1936)	 was	 one	 of	 the	 founders	 of	 the
United	 Russia	 party,	 and	 was	 the	 Mayor	 of	 Moscow	 from
1992	until	2010.
[7]
	 	 Boris	 Berezovsky,	 Roman	 Abramovich	 and	 Alexander
Mamut	 are	 all	 businessmen	 who	 were	 close	 to	 the	Yeltsin
administration	and	who	favoured	liberal	reforms	in	Russia.
Although	they	were	all	supporters	of	Putin	in	the	beginning,
they	 began	 to	 clash	 with	 him	 shortly	 after	 he	 took	 office.
Berezovsky	in	particular,	who	controlled	a	great	deal	of	the
Russian	media,	became	a	bitter	opponent	of	Putin	and	used
his	channels	against	him,	ultimately	causing	Putin	to	threaten
to	destroy	his	media	empire.	He	fled	Russia	in	late	2000,	and
lived	the	rest	of	his	life	as	an	exile	in	the	United	Kingdom.
[8]
		Alexander	Prokhanov	(b.	1938)	is	a	writer	and	editor	who	has
supported	 efforts	 to	 combine	 Communism	 with	 extreme
nationalism	in	Russia.
[9]
		Gennady	Zyuganov	(b.	1944)	has	been	the	First	Secretary	of

the	Communist	Party	of	the	Russian	Federation	(CPRF)	since
its	foundation.	The	CPRF	was	founded	in	1993	as	a	successor
to	the	banned	Communist	Party	of	the	USSR.	It	has	attempted
to	 formulate	 a	 new	 form	 of	 Communism	 with	 a	 more
nationalist	bent.
[10]
	 	Anatoly	 Chubais	 (b.	 1955)	 is	 a	 Russian	 economist	 who
spearheaded	the	privatisation	of	the	Russian	economy	in	the
early	1990s.
[11]
		The	Union	of	Right	Forces	was	a	party	founded	in	1999	with
the	aim	of	continuing	the	move	toward	a	Westernised	liberal
market	economy	in	Russia.	It	still	exists	but	today	claims	to
be	a	political	public	organisation	rather	than	a	party.
[12]
		Sergei	Kirienko	(b.	1962)	briefly	served	as	Prime	Minister
under	 Yeltsin	 in	 1998.	 He	 currently	 heads	 Russia’s	 state
nuclear	energy	programme.
[13]
		Anatoly	Sobchak	(1937-2000)	was	the	first	democratically-
elected	 mayor	 of	 Saint	 Petersburg	 from	 1991	 until	 1996.
Putin	 was	 one	 of	 his	 deputies	 during	 this	 period.	 Sobchak
died	under	suspicious	circumstances	while	campaigning	for
Putin.
[14]
		A	sixteenth-century	Russian	monk	named	Filofei	famously
prophesied	that	Moscow	would	become	the	Third	Rome.	The
first	was	Classical	Rome,	the	second	was	Constantinople,	but

these	 cities	 had	 failed	 because	 their	 peoples	 failed	 to	 fully
adopt	Christianity.	Filofei	held	that	the	mantle	of	upholding
Christianity	had	now	fallen	to	Moscow,	and	that	there	would
be	no	fourth	Rome	since	Moscow	would	fulfil	its	task	where
its	predecessors	had	failed.
[15]
		Peter	is	a	common	nickname	for	Saint	Petersburg	in	Russian.
[16]
	 	An	 Old	 Believer	 is	 a	 member	 of	 the	 Russian	 Orthodox
Church	who	continues	to	follow	the	Church’s	practices	that
predate	 reforms	 that	 were	 instituted	 in	 the	 seventeenth
century.
[17]
	 	Alexander	 Lebed	 (1950-2002)	 was	 a	 Russian	 Lieutenant
General	who	went	into	politics	in	the	1990s.	A	critic	of	Boris
Yeltsin,	 he	 ran	 against	 him	 in	 1996,	 claiming	 that	 Russia
needed	a	dictator,	citing	Augusto	Pinochet	as	an	ideal.	He
died	in	a	helicopter	crash.
[18]
		Alexander	Voloshin	(b.	1956)	was	Chief	of	the	Presidential
Administration	both	at	the	end	of	Yeltsin’s	term	and	at	the
beginning	of	Putin’s.	He	was	regarded	as	instrumental	during
the	early	years	of	Putin’s	administration.
[19]
	 	 Vladislav	 Surkov	 (b.	 1964)	 was	 First	 Deputy	 of	 the
Presidential	 Administration	 from	 1999	 until	 2011,	 and	 is
regarded	as	the	chief	ideologue	and	architect	of	the	Russian
political	system	as	it	exists	today.

[20]
		Gleb	Pavlovsky	(b.	1951)	is	a	political	scientist	who	has
worked	as	an	advisor	to	Putin.
[21]
	 	 In	 September	 1999,	 following	 the	 Russian	 invasion	 of
Dagestan,	 bombs	 were	 exploded	 on	 four	 occasions	 in
apartment	 complexes	 in	 Moscow,	 Buynaksk,	 and
Volgodonsk.	293	people	were	killed	and	over	600	injured.
Although	Islamist	leaders	in	Chechnya	denied	responsibility
for	the	attacks,	despite	having	threatened	attacks	in	Russia,
Moscow	 blamed	 them	 and	 launched	 the	 Second	 Chechen
War.
[22]
		This	refers	to	an	entourage	of	advisors	that	Putin	brought
with	him	from	Saint	Petersburg	when	he	became	President.
[23]
		Vladimir	Zhirinovsky	(b.	1946)	is	the	leader	of	the	Liberal-
Democratic	Party	of	Russia,	which	he	founded	in	1990	as	one
of	the	first	opposition	parties	allowed	in	the	Soviet	Union.	An
extreme	nationalist	of	the	populist	variety,	Zhirinovsky	has
long	 been	 known	 for	 his	 provocative	 statements	 and
outrageous	 actions,	 which	 resonate	 with	 the	 frustrations	 of
some	Russian	voters.
[24]
		Following	the	apartment	bombings	in	Moscow	in	September
1999,	 Putin,	 when	 he	 was	 still	 serving	 as	 Prime	 Minister
under	 Yeltsin,	 famously	 said,	 ‘We	 are	 going	 to	 pursue
terrorists	everywhere.	If	they	are	in	the	airport,	we	will	pursue

them	in	the	airport.	And	if	we	capture	them	in	the	toilet,	then
we	 will	 waste	 them	 in	 the	 outhouse.’	This	 phrase	 became
closely	identified	with	Putin	during	his	election	campaign	the
following	year.
[25]
	 	Wahhabism	 is	 an	 extremely	 strict,	 literal	 interpretation	 of
Sunni	Islam.	Many	militant	jihadis	around	the	world	claim	to
follow	its	teachings,	or	an	ideology	derived	from	it.
[26]
		The	Eurasian	Economic	Community	was	proclaimed	in	1996
and	 includes	 Russia,	 Belarus,	 Kazakhstan,	 Kyrgzstan,
Tajikistan,	and	Uzbekistan.
[27]
		In	June	2004,	Putin	addressed	a	conference	dedicated	to	the
ideas	of	the	Eurasian	theorist,	Lev	Gumilev,	and	praised	him
for	 depicting	 the	 world	 in	 terms	 of	 a	 united	 Eurasia	 in
opposition	to	the	West,	calling	it	an	idea	that	was	beginning
to	‘move	the	masses’.
[28]
		A	central	concept	of	Dugin’s	Eurasianism	is	that	since	the
collapse	of	the	Soviet	Union	and	the	bipolar	global	order	that
had	 existed	 prior	 to	 that,	 geopolitics	 has	 been	 that	 of	 a
unipolar	world	dominated	solely	by	the	United	States,	which
has	allowed	the	US	to	dictate	the	global	order	ever	since.	The
Eurasianists	favor	a	transition	to	a	multipolar	world,	in	which
powers	from	all	the	major	areas	of	the	globe	will	stand	at
roughly	the	same	level	and	look	after	the	interests	of	their
own	regional	blocs.

[29]
		Eurasianism	first	emerged	as	an	idea	among	Russian	émigrés
in	Europe	following	the	October	Revolution,	believing	that
Russia	is	a	unique	civilisation	that	is	neither	European	nor
Asian,	 but	 possesses	 its	 own	 unique	 nature	 and	 destiny.
Eurasianism	re-emerged	after	the	collapse	of	the	Soviet	Union
and	is	the	idea	underlying	Dugin’s	own	Eurasia	Movement.
Eurasianists	 today	 also	 believe	 that	 it	 is	 Russia’s	 duty	 to
reintegrate	those	territories	that	were	once	part	of	the	Russian
Empire	and/or	the	Soviet	Union	into	Russia.	
[30]
	 	 Mikhail	 Khodorkovsky	 (b.	 1963),	 an	 outspoken	 critic	 of
Putin,	was	a	Russian	oligarch	who	was	arrested	in	2003	on
charges	of	fraud	and	ultimately	imprisoned.	Putin	pardoned
him	and	he	was	released	in	December	2013	(after	this	was
written).
[31]
		A	Russian	television	network	created	by	Gusinsky	which
was	known	for	its	criticisms	of	Putin’s	policies.
[32]
	 	 Advocates	 of	 civil	 society	 in	 Russia	 favour	 a	 greater
interaction	between	the	government	and	those	organisations
which	claim	to	advocate	for	the	wishes	of	the	citizenry,	in
particular	Non-governmental	organisations	(NGOs).
[33]
		Zbigniew	Brzezinski	(b.	1928)	is	a	Polish-American	political
thinker	who	served	as	National	Security	Advisor	to	President
Carter,	where	he	advocated	for	greater	confrontation	with	the
Soviet	Union,	and	who	has	been	influential	in	several	other

American	administrations	up	to	the	present	day.	He	is	still	a
well-regarded	political	and	geopolitical	commentator,	where
he	defends	American	interests	and	is	highly	critical	of	Russia.
[34]
		Century	10,	Quatrain	72.
[35]
		A	group	dedicated	to	the	study	of	religious	and	mystical
ideas	 that	 was	 run	 by	 Dugin	 in	 the	 late	 1990s	 and	 early
2000s.
[36]
	 	 Saint	 Joseph	 Volotsky	 (1440-1515)	 was	 a	 monk	 who
supported	the	idea	that	the	Tsars	were	God’s	representatives
on	Earth,	but	he	also	believed	that	this	authority	was	valid
provided	that	the	Tsar	followed	the	Church’s	teaching	and
authority.
[37]
		Avvakum	Petrov	(1620-1682)	was	a	Protopope	who	led	the
opposition	against	Patriarch	Nikon’s	attempts	to	reform	the
Russian	Orthodox	Church,	believing	it	to	be	a	deviation	from
the	 Church’s	 mission.	 Avvakum	 was	 imprisoned	 several
times	and	finally	burned	at	the	stake	for	his	resistance.	His
followers	 persisted	 and	 later	 became	 known	 as	 the	 Old
Believers.
[38]
	 	 Alexander	 Dugin,	 ‘Dawn	 in	 Boots’,	 available	 at	 the
Arctogaia	Web	site	(Russian	only):	
www.arctogaia.com/public/zarya.html	-	 an	 article	 about	 the
role	 of	 former	 KGB	 officers	 in	 Russia’s	 Eurasian

renaissance.-AD	(This	article	in	Russian	only.-Ed.)	
[39]
		From	Psalm	130.
[40]
	 	Yuri	 Mamleev	 (b.	 1931)	 is	 a	 writer	 and	 a	 metaphysical
realist.-AD
[41]
		‘Three	steps	forward,	two	steps	back.’-AD
[42]
		Jean	Richepin	(1849-1926)	was	a	French	writer.	The	phrase
comes	from	his	1884	play,	Les	Blasphemes.
[43]
		President	Reagan	infamously	referred	to	the	Soviet	Union	as
the	 ‘evil	 empire’	 in	 a	 speech	 in	 March	 1983	 in	 which	 he
called	for	greater	confrontation	with	the	USSR	to	counter	its
expansionist	aims.
[44]
		In	the	second	century	BC,	‘Carthage	must	be	destroyed’	was
a	popular	saying	among	the	Romans	during	the	Punic	Wars,
who	 believed	 that	 the	 long-standing	 threat	 posed	 by	 their
rival	could	only	be	ended	through	the	destruction	of	the	city.
The	Romans	finally	did	destroy	the	city	in	146	BC.
[45]
	 	 Traditionalism,	 a	 school	 of	 thought	 initiated	 by	 the
philosophers	René	Guénon,	Julius	Evola	and	Frithjof	Schuon
holds	 that	 there	 is	 a	 set	 of	 transcendental	 metaphysical
principles	which	lies	at	the	heart	of	all	authentic	religions	and
mystical	traditions,	and	which	remains	the	same	even	when
there	are	differences	in	the	exoteric	practices	and	doctrines.
Traditionalism	is	also	deeply	critical	of	the	modern	world.

[46]
	 	 The	 Conservative	 Revolution	 designates	 a	 loose
confederation	 of	 anti-liberal	 German	 thinkers	 who	 wrote
during	the	Weimar	Republic.	There	was	a	great	diversity	of
views	within	the	ranks	of	the	Conservative	Revolutionaries,
but	in	general	they	opposed	both	democratic	capitalism	and
Communism	 in	 favour	 of	 a	 synthesis	 of	 aristocratic,
nationalism	and	spiritual	values	with	socialism.
[47]
		The	Third	Way	is	a	term	used	for	a	wide	variety	of	political
and	economic	ideologies	that	have	attempted	to	to	transcend
the	dichotomy	between	liberal	democracy	and	socialism.	The
various	fascist	movements	of	the	mid-twentieth	century	were
iterations	of	the	Third	Way.
[48]
		The	Front	of	National	Salvation	was	established	in	1992	as
an	alliance	of	Communists	and	nationalists	in	opposition	to
the	 post-Soviet	 reforms	 being	 enacted	 by	 Yeltsin’s
administration.	Yeltsin	 banned	 the	 party	 (the	 first	 time	 this
occurred	in	post-Soviet	Russia),	but	this	was	overruled	by	the
courts	a	few	months	later.	The	Front	played	a	key	role	in	the
constitutional	 crisis	 of	 September-October	 1993.	The	 Front
collapsed	in	1994.
[49]
	 	 Several	 groups	 claim	 to	 be	 National	 Bolshevik,	 both	 in
Russia	 and	 abroad.	 National	 Bolshevik	 ideology,	 which
emerged	after	the	First	World	War	as	an	attempt	to	synthesise
Communism	and	nationalism,	was	originally	formulated	by

some	 participants	 in	 Germany’s	 Conservative	 Revolution,
such	 as	 Ernst	 Jünger	 and	 Ernst	 Niekisch.	 National
Bolshevism	was	also	present	among	some	members	of	the
anti-Soviet	White	 movement	 and	 even	 among	 some	 Soviet
Communists	in	the	days	of	the	Russian	Civil	War,	although
Lenin	and	Stalin	both	opposed	it.	Regardless,	elements	of	the
ideology	re-emerged	in	Stalin’s	brand	of	nationalism,	which
began	to	appear	in	the	1930s.
[50]
		Eduard	Limonov	(b.	1943)	is	a	Russian	writer	who	lived	as
an	expatriate	in	both	the	US	and	in	Paris	during	the	Soviet
era.	 Limonov	 returned	 to	 Russia	 in	 1991	 and	 founded	 the
National	 Bolshevik	 Party	 (NBP)	 the	 following	 year,	 and
Dugin	was	an	influential	early	member.	Dugin	soon	left	the
party	to	found	his	own,	the	National	Bolshevik	Front,	and
later	abandoned	National	Bolshevism	altogether	to	form	the
Eurasia	Movement	in	2001,	although	he	still	acknowledges	a
debt	to	NB	thought.	The	party	was	banned	in	2007.
[51]
		The	Party	of	Russia’s	Rebirth	was	a	Leftist	nationalist	party
established	in	2003	by	Gennady	Seleznev,	who	had	been	the
Speaker	of	the	Duma	between	1996	and	2004	and	a	member
of	the	Communist	Party.	It	was	dissolved	in	2008.
[52]
	 	 Our	 Home	 —	 Russia	 was	 a	 political	 party	 that	 existed
between	1995	and	2000.	A	liberal	party,	it	was	instrumental
in	Yeltin’s	 re-election	 in	 1996.	 It	 merged	 into	 the	 United

Russia	party	in	2000.
[53]
		Fatherland	—	All	Russia	was	a	political	party	between	1998
and	2002	that	was	founded	by	Yuri	Luzhkov	and	supported
the	 election	 of	 Putin.	 In	 2002	 it	 merged	 with	 the	 United
Russia	party.
[54]
	 	 ’Russia	 has	 always	 felt	 like	 a	 Eurasian	 country’,	 Beta-
PRESS,	available	(Russian	only)	at	beta-press.ru/article/295.-
AD	(The	article	is	in	Russian	only.	Putin	made	this	comment
in	November	2000,	shortly	after	assuming	the	Presidency.-
Ed.)
[55]
	 	Alexander	 Dugin,	The	Conservative	Revolution	 (Moscow:
Arctogaia,	1994).-AD	(No	English	translation	exists.-Ed.)
[56]
	 	 United	 Russia	 is	 currently	 the	 largest	 political	 party	 in
Russia,	and	is	the	party	of	Putin.
[57]
		Elements	was	a	journal	edited	by	Dugin.
[58]
		None	of	these	books	has	been	translated	into	English	as	of
yet.
[59]
		Stéphane	Mallarmé	(1842-1898)	was	one	of	the	major	poets
of	the	French	Symbolist	school.
[60]
	 	 Heidegger	 elaborates	 on	 this	 phrase	 in	 his	 ‘Letter	 on
“Humanism”’,	   in	Pathmarks	(Cambridge:	 Cambridge
University	Press,	1998).
[61]
		The	ownership	of	territories	which	is	passed	to	the	children

of	a	leader	by	right	of	heredity.
[62]
		‘Pro-West	Putin	Snubs	His	Public’	(16	May	2002),	available
at	articles.latimes.com/2002/may/16/world/fg-russia16.
[63]
		The	Cheka	was	the	original	secret	service	of	the	Communist
Party	in	the	USSR,	during	the	time	of	the	Russian	Revolution.
The	 term	 ‘Orthodox	 Chekists’	 refers	 to	 a	 circle	 of	 people
who,	like	Putin	himself,	have	or	had	connections	to	the	secret
police,	 but	 who	 today,	 unlike	 in	 militantly	 atheist	 Soviet
times,	are	staunchly	pro-Orthodox	Church.
[64]
		A	Just	Russia	is	a	socialist	party	that	was	formed	in	2006
and	staunchly	defends	Russia’s	welfare	programmes.
[65]
		The	Right	Cause	is	a	party	established	in	2009	that	favours
liberal	economic	policies	and	democratic	reforms.
[66]
		Yabloko	is	a	party	that	was	established	in	1993	with	the	aim
of	supporting	liberal	reforms	in	Russia.	It	also	favours	closer
relations	with	the	US	and	Russian	membership	in	the	EU.
[67]
		Okna,	or	‘The	Windows’,	is	a	talk	show.
[68]
		‘Projector	Paris	Hilton’	was	a	satirical	news	programme,	the
title	of	which	was	a	spoof	of	a	Gorbachev-era	programme
that	had	been	called	‘Projector	of	the	Perestroika’.
[69]
	 	 ‘New	 Gazette’	 is	 a	 popular	 liberal	 and	 pro-Western
opposition	newspaper.
[70]
		‘Echo	of	Moscow,’	a	news	radio	station	which	also	supports

a	widely-cited	Website.
[71]
	 	 Garry	 Kasparov	 (b.	 1963)	 is	 a	 chess	 Grandmaster	 and
former	 World	 Chess	 Champion.	 In	 recent	 years	 he	 has
become	a	staunch	opponent	of	the	Putin	administration.
[72]
		Alexei	Venediktov	(b.	1955)	is	the	editor-in-chief	of	Echo	of
Moscow.
[73]
	 	 The	 All-Russian	 People’s	 Front	 is	 an	 organisation
inaugurated	in	2011	by	Putin	with	the	stated	aim	of	providing
United	Russia	with	new	ideas	and	personnel.
[74]
		Norilsk	is	a	mining	city	in	northern	Russia.
[75]
		In	English	in	the	Russian	edition.
[76]
		The	Russian	for	‘Who	is	Mr	Putin’?
[77]
	 	 Paraphrased	 from	 the	 lyrics	 to	 the	 socialist	 anthem,	 ‘The
Internationale’.	Part	of	the	first	stanza	reads,	‘We	have	been
nothing;	let	us	be	all.’
[78]
		A	term	for	the	people	around	Yeltsin;	not	just	those	who
were	actual	relatives	of	his,	but	also	many	of	their	advisors
and	financial	supporters.
[79]
	 	Yegor	 Gaidar	 (1956-2009)	 was	Acting	 Prime	 Minister	 of
Russia	during	the	second	half	of	1992,	and	was	the	leader	of
many	 of	 the	 economic	 reforms	 which	 rapidly	 transitioned
Russia	 away	 from	 Communism	 (‘shock	 therapy’).	 He	 was
held	 responsible	 by	 many	 Russians	 for	 the	 economic

hardships	of	the	1990s.
[80]
		Oleg	Poptsov	was	the	founder	of	the	state-owned	All-Russia
State	Television	and	Radio	Broadcasting	Company	in	1990,
and	ran	the	TV	station	TVC	for	many	years.
[81]
		Alexander	Yakovlev	(1923-2005)	was	part	of	the	Politburo,
Secretariat	 of	 the	 Communist	 Party	 and	 an	 advisor	 to
Gorbachev.	 Called	 the	 ‘godfather	 of	 glasnost’,	 he	 was	 the
architect	 of	 many	 of	 Gorbachev’s	 reforms.	 Following	 the
collapse	of	the	Soviet	Union,	he	continued	to	fight	for	liberal
reforms	and	was	later	a	critic	of	Putin’s	policies.
[82]
	 	 Valentin	 Yumashev	 (b.	 1957)	 was	 a	 close	 associate	 of
Yeltsin	and	served	as	Chairman	of	the	Presidential	Executive
Office	in	1997-98.
[83]
	 	 Russian	 National	 Unity	 is	 a	 far-Right,	 paramilitary	 party
which	calls	for	the	expulsion	of	all	non-Russians	from	Russia.
Following	a	crackdown	by	the	government	in	the	late	1990s,
the	party	is	largely	inactive	now.
[84]
	 	 Boris	 Nemtsov	 (b.	 1959)	 was	 Governor	 of	 the	 Nizhny
Novgorod	region	from	1991	until	1997,	where	he	oversaw	a
radical	transition	to	the	free	market	that	earned	the	praise	of
Western	 politicians.	 After	 that	 he	 served	 as	 First	 Deputy
Prime	 Minister.	 In	 recent	 years	 he	 has	 been	 arrested	 on
multiple	occasions	for	participating	in	unauthorised	protests

against	Putin’s	administration.
[85]
		Mikhail	Kasyanov	(b.	1957)	became	Minister	of	Finance	in
1999	 and	 then	 Prime	 Minister	 in	 2000.	 He	 began	 to
implement	 many	 reforms,	 but	 became	 unpopular	 with	 the
Russian	populace	who	felt	that	his	pace	of	reform	was	too
slow,	and	he	was	dismissed,	along	with	Putin’s	entire	cabinet,
in	2004,	just	prior	to	the	elections.	Since	then	he	has	become
a	vocal	critic	of	Putin.
[86]
	 	 Valeriya	 Novodvorskaya	 (1950-2014)	 was	 a	 famous
dissident	from	the	Soviet	era	who	had	been	imprisoned	in	a
psychiatric	hospital.	She	later	became	a	harsh	critic	of	Putin,
and	once	infamously	said	in	an	interview	that	it	was	Russian
policies	in	Chechnya	that	had	resulted	in	terrorism.
[87]
		German	Gräf	(b.	1964)	was	the	Minister	of	Economics	and
Trade	from	2000	until	his	dismissal	in	2007.		Regarded	as
one	of	the	liberals	in	Putin’s	cabinet,	one	of	his	less	popular
reforms	was	the	monetisation	of	benefits.
[88]
		Alexei	Kudrin	(b.	1960)	was	the	Minister	of	Finance	from
2000	until	2011.
[89]
		Andrei	Illarionov	(b.	1961)	became	Putin’s	senior	economic
advisor	in	2000,	and	also	acted	as	Putin’s	representative	to
the	 G8	 summit.	 In	 2005	 he	 resigned	 on	 the	 grounds	 that
Russia	was	becoming	an	undemocratic	state	under	Putin.	He
currently	works	at	the	Cato	Institute	in	Washington,	DC.

[90]
	 	 In	 1999,	 the	 Unity	 party	 was	 formed	 by	 the	 Yeltsin
administration	to	fight	the	popular	Fatherland	—	All	Russia
party	in	the	2000	elections,	and	assisted	the	rise	of	Putin.	In
2001	it	merged	into	the	United	Russia	party.
[91]
		The	Russian	Union	of	Industrialists	and	Entrepreneurs	is	a
lobby	that	works	on	behalf	of	big	business.
[92]
		Igor	Sechin	(b.	1960)	has	been	a	close	advisor	of	Putin	since
his	initial	election	as	President.	He	is	the	leader	of	the	siloviki
lobby,	 which	 represents	 those	 veterans	 of	 Russia’s	 secret
service	agencies	who	have	gone	into	politics.
[93]
		Mikhail	Lesin	(b.	1958)	was	the	creator	of	the	Russia	Today
network.
[94]
		Vladimir	Kulistikov	(b.	1952)	has	been	the	head	of	the	NTV
network	since	2004.
[95]
		Konstantin	Ernst	(b.	1961)	is	the	Director	General	of	the
Channel	 One	 network.	 He	 was	 also	 the	 director	 of	 the
opening	ceremony	of	the	2014	Winter	Olympics.
[96]
		Oleg	Dobrodeev	(b.	1959)	has	been	the	director	of	the	All-
Russia	 State	 Television	 and	 Radio	 Broadcasting	 Company
since	2000.
[97]
		Sergei	Markov	(b.	1958)	is	a	political	scientist	who	works	as
a	consultant	to	the	Russian	government.
[98]
		Vyacheslav	Nikonov	(b.	1956)	is	a	political	scientist	who

has	worked	in	the	Russian	government	since	the	Gorbachev
administration.	He	is	currently	in	the	State	Duma.
[99]
		Sergei	Ivanov	(b.	1953)	was	Minister	of	Defence	between
2001	 and	 2007,	 and	 is	 currently	 Chief	 of	 Staff	 of	 the
Presidential	Administration.	 He	 was	 appointed	 secretary	 of
the	Security	Council	between	1999	and	2001,	following	Putin
in	the	role.
[100]
		A	reference	to	Ivan	III	(1440-1505),	who	ended	Mongol
rule	over	Russia	and	tripled	the	size	of	Russia’s	territory.	He
was	called	‘the	gatherer	of	the	Russian	lands’.
[101]
	 	 Prior	 to	 2000,	 a	 loophole	 in	 the	 Constitution	 made	 it
possible	for	the	regional	governors	to	both	occupy	both	their
regional	 offices	 and	 a	 seat	 on	 the	 Federation	 Council
simultaneously.	In	2000	Putin	changed	the	law	so	that	the
governors	could	only	designate	representatives	to	sit	on	the
Council	 but	 not	 do	 so	 themselves.	 The	 governors,
recognising	that	this	would	greatly	reduce	their	power	and
influence,	 were	 furious,	 but	 under	 pressure	 from	 the	 State
Duma	and	threats	from	Putin	to	conduct	legal	investigations,
they	finally	relented.
[102]
		Putin	established	the	State	Council	in	2000	as	an	advisory
body	to	the	President.
[103]
	 	Alexander	 Lukashenko	 (b.	 1954)	 has	 been	 President	 of

Belarus	since	1994.	He	is	known	for	having	preserved	the
Soviet	structure	of	government	in	his	country.
[104]
		Sergei	Yastrzhembsky	(b.	1953)	,	after	working	as	a	press
spokesman	for	the	Kremlin,	was	appointed	the	presidential
envoy	to	the	EU	in	2004.
[105]
		The	Land	Code	adopted	in	2001	provided	for	the	private
development	of	land	without	government	intervention,	which
was	the	first	time	this	had	been	done	in	Russia.
[106]
		Unified	Energy	Systems	of	Russia	was	a	holding	company
for	the	power	industry.	In	the	mid-2000s	it	was	broken	up
into	several	companies	in	an	effort	to	privatise	the	industry.
[107]
		Sergei	Glazyev	(b.	1961)	was	one	of	the	co-founders	of	the
Rodina	party.	He	currently	works	as	an	aide	to	Putin	for	the
development	of	the	Customs	Union.
[108]
	 	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche,	Thus	 Spoke	 Zarathustra	(Cambridge:
Cambridge	University	Press,	2006),	p.	46.
[109]
		The	American	neoconservative	theorist	Francis	Fukuyama
famously	postulated	in	a	1989	article	and	a	subsequent	1992
book,	The	 End	 of	 History	 and	 the	 Last	 Man,	 that	 the
development	 of	 Western-style	 liberal	 democracy	 and
capitalism	 represents	 the	 end-point	 in	 the	 development	 of
human	 civilisation,	 and	 that	 it	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time
before	this	system	spread	to	and	was	adopted	in	every	corner

of	 the	 globe.	 More	 recently,	 Fukuyama	 has	 considerably
revised	this	view.
[110]
		‘A	Cyborg	Manifesto’,	originally	published	in	1983,	uses
the	cyborg	as	a	means	to	demonstrate	problems	in	feminist
theory	—	namely,	the	blurring	of	barriers	between	humans,
animals	and	machines,	which	allegedly	parallel	the	blurring
of	 barriers	 between	 genders	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century.	 It	 is
available	at	www.egs.edu/faculty/donna-
haraway/articles/donna-haraway-a-cyborg-manifesto/.
[111]
		Friedrich	Hayek	(1899-1992)	was	an	economist	who	was
crucial	 to	 the	 development	 of	 the	 Austrian	 school	 of
economics.	He	opposed	collectivism	and	state	control	of	the
economy	 in	 favour	 of	 classical	 liberalism,	 holding	 that	 the
free	market	and	limited	government	were	the	only	effective
methods	of	organising	societies.
[112]
		Constantinople	was	the	capitol	of	the	Byzantine	Empire	and
thus	the	center	of	Orthodox	Christianity	until	its	conquest	by
the	 Ottoman	 Empire	 in	 1453.	Tsargrad	 is	 the	 old	 Russian
name	for	it.
[113]
		The	era	of	the	Grand	Duchy	of	Muscovy	lasted	from	the
early	fourteenth	century	until	the	beginning	of	the	Russian
Empire	under	Ivan	the	Terrible	in	1547.
[114]
	 	This	 refers	 to	 the	 split	 between	 the	 established	 Russian
Orthodox	Church	and	the	Old	Believers	in	the	seventeenth

century.
[115]
	 	 Nikolai	 Klyuev	 (1884-1937)	 was	 a	 Symbolist	 poet	 who
initially	 supported	 the	 Russian	 Revolution	 and	 joined	 the
Communist	 Party.	 By	 the	 1920s,	 however,	 he	 became
increasingly	critical	of	the	Soviet	regime,	and	he	was	shot	in
1937	for	his	opposition.
[116]
	 	Andrei	 Platonov	 (1899-1951)	 was	 a	 writer	 who	 initially
supported	the	Communists	but	became	increasingly	critical	of
them	 as	 time	 went	 on,	 earning	 the	 ire	 of	 the	 Communist
establishment.
[117]
		Greek:	‘king’.
[118]
	 	 The	 katechon	 is	 a	 concept	 derived	 from	Thessalonians
which	 refers	 to	 that	 which	 prevents	 the	 Antichrist	 from
manifesting	 in	 the	 world.	 Carl	 Schmitt	 believed	 that	 the
katechon	was	the	justification	of	the	Church’s	role	in	politics
and	society	and	was	the	ultimate	meaning	of	Christianity	in
the	world,	as	he	wrote	in	The	Nomos	of	the	Earth.
[119]
		Jean	Bodin	(1530-1596)	was	a	French	political	philosopher.
[120]
		Classical	Greek:	‘purpose’	or	‘goal’.
[121]
		Arthur	Moeller	van	den	Bruck	(1876-1925)	was	one	of	the
principal	authors	of	the	German	Conservative	Revolution.	He
is	best	known	for	his	1923	book,	Das	Dritte	Reich	(translated
as	Germany’s	Third	Empire,	reissued	by	Arktos	in	2012).

[122]
		Ludwig	Gumplowicz	(1838-1909)	is	considered	one	of	the
founders	 of	 sociology.	 He	 was	 particularly	 concerned	 with
the	role	of	minorities	in	states.
[123]
		La	 Lutte	 des	 races:	 Recherches	 sociologiques	 (Paris:
Guillaumin,	1893).	No	English	translation	exists.
[124]
		Greek:	‘nation’,	in	the	sense	of	a	community	of	people	who
all	share	a	common	heritage.
[125]
		Robert	Michels	(1876-1936)	was	a	German	sociologist	and
student	of	Max	Weber.	His	principal	work	is	Political	Parties:
A	 Sociological	 Study	 of	 the	 Oligarchical	 Tendencies	 of
Modern	 Democracy	 (New	 York:	 Hearst’s	 International
Library	Co.,	1915)
[126]
		Ernest	Johann	Biron	was	the	German	lover	of	Tsarina	Anna
during	her	reign	in	mid-eighteenth	century.	Biron	is	thought
to	 have	 exercised	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 influence	 over	Anna	 in
terms	 of	 inspiring	 Western-style	 reforms.	 This	 period	 is
sometimes	referred	to	as	the	Age	of	Biron	due	to	the	fact	that
Anna’s	court	was	made	up	largely	of	Germans,	and	since	she
exhibited	a	strong	prejudice	in	favour	of	Germans.
[127]
		Dmitri	Dashkov	(1784-1839)	was	an	advisor	at	the	Tsarist
embassy	 in	 Constantinople	 from	 1817-1823.	 An	 Old
Believer,	he	favoured	the	restoration	of	the	Patriarchate.
[128]
		The	highest	office	in	the	Orthodox	Church,

[129]
		A	type	of	military	cap	that	was	modelled	after	that	of	the
Hungarian	hussars.
[130]
		Leviathan	 is	 the	 principal	 work	 of	 the	 English	 political
theorist	 Thomas	 Hobbes,	 first	 published	 in	 1651.	 Hobbes
argued	that	the	natural	state	of	humanity	is	‘the	war	of	all
against	all’,	and	that	it	is	only	through	strong	government	that
order	can	be	maintained.	It	is	considered	one	of	the	seminal
texts	of	liberal	democracy.
[131]
		In	the	Eastern	Orthodox	tradition,	symphonia	refers	to	the
idea	that	the	state	and	the	Church	authorities	should	remain
independent,	but	work	in	tandem	with	each	other.
[132]
		Patriarch	Nikon	(1605-1681)	was	the	seventh	Patriarch	of
the	 Russian	 Orthodox	 Church.	 He	 initiated	 reforms	 which
were	later	to	culminate	in	the	Schism.
[133]
		Tsar	Alexis	(1629-1676)	reigned	from	1645	to	1676.
[134]
		Paisius	Ligarides	was	a	Greek	prelate	who	presided	over	an
ecclesiastical	council	which	resulted	in	the	exile	of	Patriarch
Nikon	in	1666.	Nikon	believed	that	spiritual	authority	should
take	 precedence	 over	 the	 political	 authority;	 the	 council,
favouring	the	absolute	authority	of	the	Tsar,	disagreed.
[135]
		Various	sects	of	Old	Believers	within	the	Russian	Orthodox
Church.
[136]
	 	Alexei	 II	 (1929-2008)	 was	 the	 fifteenth	 Patriarch	 of	 the

Russian	Orthodox	Church,	from	1990	until	his	death.
[137]
		Classical	Greek:	‘the	people’,	in	the	sense	of	the	common
people	in	a	Greek	city-state.
[138]
	 	 Yukos	 was	 an	 oil	 and	 gas	 company	 owned	 by
Khodorkovsky.	It	went	bankrupt	in	2006	as	a	result	of	being
unable	 to	 pay	 taxes	 levied	 by	 the	 Russian	 government,
following	accusations	of	tax	evasion.
[139]
		On	20	March	2003,	shortly	after	the	American	invasion	of
Iraq	 began,	 Putin	 demanded	 that	 the	 US	 cease	 hostilities,
referring	to	the	war	as	‘a	big	political	mistake’.
[140]
	 	 At	 the	 Munich	 Conference	 on	 Security	 Policy	 on	 12
February	 2007,	 Putin	 condemned	 the	 order	 represented	 by
the	unipolar	world,	calling	for	multipolarity,	and	accused	the
US	of	overstepping	its	bounds.		The	complete	text	is	available
at	www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2007/02/12/AR2007021200555.html.
[141]
		The	Treaty	of	Warsaw	established	the	Warsaw	Pact	in	1955,
which	was	the	Soviet	answer	to	NATO	by	providing	a	treaty
of	 mutual	 defence	 among	 the	 Communist	 states	 in	 Europe
that	were	under	Soviet	domination.
[142]
	 	 This	 term	 has	 been	 widely	 used	 with	 several	 different
meanings	starting	from	the	eighteenth	century.	Rousseau	for
example	used	the	words	démocratie	souveraine	to	denote	the

sovereign	power	of	the	people;	in	America	in	the	nineteenth
century	 the	 ‘party	 of	 sovereign	 democracy’	 was	 called	 the
Democratic	Party.-AD
[143]
		Julius	Pokorny	(1887-1970)	was	an	Austrian	linguist.
[144]
		Indogermanisches	 etymologisches	 Wörterbuch,	 4	 vols.
(Bern:	Francke,	1951-1969).
[145]
		This	is	a	key	dichotomy	in	geopolitical	thought,	as	first
established	 by	 Sir	 Halford	 Mackinder.	 Carl	 Schmitt	 wrote,
‘World	history	is	the	history	of	the	wars	waged	by	maritime
powers	 against	 land	 or	 continental	 powers	 and	 by	 land
powers	 against	 sea	 or	 maritime	 powers’,	 in	Land	 and	 Sea
(Washington,	DC:	Plutarch	Press,	1997).
[146]
		The	Energy	Charter	Treaty	was	signed	at	the	end	of	1991
with	the	intention	of	integrating	the	energy	resources	of	the
former	 Eastern	 bloc	 territories	 into	 the	 global	 marketplace.
Russia	 has	 refused	 to	 ratify	 it,	 which	 it	 sees	 as	 unfairly
balanced	against	its	national	interests.
[147]
		‘Assembly	of	the	land’.
[148]
		Louis	XIV	of	France	was	called	the	‘Sun	King’,	since	he
made	France	the	most	powerful	country	in	Europe	in	his	day.
[149]
	 	 On	 22	 October	 2002,	 Chechen	 terrorists	 attacked	 the
Dubrovka	 theatre	 in	 Moscow	 during	 a	 performance	 of	 the
musical	Nord-Ost	and	took	the	entire	audience	as	well	as	the

performers	and	crew	captive,	numbering	approximately	850
people.	After	two	and	a	half	days,	Russian	security	services
pumped	gas	into	the	building	and	then	stormed	the	theatre.
All	of	the	terrorists	and	over	130	hostages	died	in	the	attack.
[150]
		In	Islam,	this	refers	to	the	entire	community	of	Muslims
around	the	world.
[151]
	 	 Movsar	 Barayev	 (1979-2002)	 was	 the	 leader	 of	 the
Chechens	who	attacked	the	theatre.
[152]
		Ibn	al-Khattab	(1969-2002)	was	a	Saudi-born	jihadi	who
fought	against	the	Russians	in	Afghanistan	during	the	1980s,
and	later	received	training	in	Al	Qaeda	camps	there.	He	went
to	Chechnya	in	1995	and	fought	against	the	Russians	in	both
wars,	and	also	in	the	Dagestan	War.	He	was	assassinated	by
the	FSB	in	March	2002.
[153]
		Irina	Khakamada	(b.	1955)	ran	against	Putin	in	the	2004
election.
[154]
		In	Greek	mythology,	the	Symplegades	were	two	‘clashing
rocks’	that	stood	at	the	entrance	of	the	Bosporus	to	the	Black
Sea,	preventing	travelers	from	passing	through.	They	stopped
clashing	after	Jason	and	the	Argonauts	succeeded	in	passing
through	them.
[155]
		Louis	XIV	(1638-1715)	was	the	King	of	France	from	1643
until	his	death.	He	made	France	the	leading	power	in	Europe

and	 consolidated	 political	 power	 over	 the	 country	 in	 the
monarchy.
[156]
		Again,	a	reference	to	Ivan	III.
[157]
		From	Mark	9:48,	where	Hell	is	described	as	a	place	where
‘the	 worms	 that	 eat	 them	 do	 not	 die,	 and	 the	 fire	 is	 not
quenched’.
[158]
		Before	the	2004	election,	Garry	Kasparov	led	a	coalition
which	urged	Russians	to	boycott	it,	claiming	that	the	election
would	be	a	farce	of	democracy.
[159]
		Kasparov	and	others	who	opposed	Putin	attempted	another
boycott	during	the	2012	elections.
[160]
	 	Akhmad	 Kadyrov	 (1951-2004)	 was	 the	 Russian-backed
President	of	the	Chechen	Republic.	On	9	May	2004,	he	was
killed	in	a	bomb	blast	set	by	Chechen	rebels	while	attending	a
victory	parade	celebrating	the	USSR’s	victory	in	the	Second
World	War.
[161]
		The	date	that	Russia	and	the	other	former	Soviet	republics
celebrate	 their	 victory	 over	 Germany	 in	 the	 Second	World
War,	when	Germany’s	unconditional	surrender	to	the	Allies
went	into	effect,	Moscow	time.
[162]
	 	 Mikhail	 Saakashvili	 (b.	 1967)	 was	 President	 of	 Georgia
from	2004	until	2013.
[163]
	 	 Throughout	 Saakashvili’s	 first	 term,	 there	 were	 many

clashes	 between	 the	 Georgian	 military	 and	 pro-Russian
separatists	in	South	Ossetia.
[164]
		Aslan	Abashidze	(b.	1938)	was	the	leader	of	the	Ajarian
Autonomous	Republic	in	Georgia	between	1991	and	2004.
Following	 the	 Rose	 Revolution,	 tensions	 arose	 between
Abashidze	and	the	Georgian	government	when	it	asserted	its
authority	over	the	separatist	regions.	After	Abashidze	accused
the	Georgian	government	of	attempting	to	overthrow	him	and
mobilised	his	armed	forces,	he	resigned	when	they	refused	to
fight	against	Georgian	forces	that	entered	the	republic.
[165]
		Another	region	claimed	by	Georgia	that	has	declared	its
autonomy.
[166]
		Sergei	Abramov	(b.	1972)	was	Minister	of	Finance	when
Kadyrov’s	 assassination,	 and	 temporarily	 took	 his	 place	 in
the	aftermath.
[167]
		Ramzan	Kadyrov	(b.	1976)	was	appointed	Deputy	Prime
Minister	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 his	 father’s	 assassination.	 Putin
appointed	 him	 President	 of	 Chechnya	 in	 2007,	 following
Alkhanov’s	dismissal.
[168]
	 	Alu	Alkhanov	 (b.	 1957)	 was	 a	 former	 soldier	 who	 was
Minister	of	the	Interior	at	the	time	of	Kadyrov’s	assassination.
He	was	elected	President	of	Chechnya	in	August	2004.	Putin
dismissed	him	in	February	2007	and	appointed	him	a	Deputy
Justice	Minister	in	Russia.

[169]
		The	Rose	Revolution	was	a	peaceful,	Western-backed	mass
protest	 movement	 that	 brought	 about	 regime	 change	 in
Georgia	in	November	2003.	It	was	seen	in	part	as	an	attempt
by	the	US	to	weaken	Russia’s	influence	over	the	country.
[170]
		Nursultan	Nazarbayev	(b.	1940)	has	been	the	President	of
Kazakhstan	since	1989.
[171]
	 	 The	 Union	 State	 is	 a	 commonwealth	 that	 was	 formed
between	 Russia	 and	 Belarus	 in	 1996.	 While	 Russia	 has
attempted	 to	 strengthen	 the	 Union,	 Belarus	 has	 remained
resistant,	 fearing	 for	 its	 independence.	 Discussion	 of	 the
Union	State	has	been	subsumed	into	Russia’s	larger	project	of
a	Eurasian	Union	for	the	region.
[172]
		Maxim	Galkin	(b.	1976)	is	a	Russian	comedian.
[173]
		Viktor	Kristenko	(b.	1957)	was	the	Minister	of	Industry
from	2004	until	2012.
[174]
	 	 The	siloviki	 lobby	 represents	 those	 veterans	 of	 Russia’s
secret	service	agencies	who	have	gone	into	politics.
[175]
		Putin	coined	the	term	‘vertical	power’	to	describe	his	intent
to	bring	about	the	centralisation	of	political	power	in	Russia
within	the	federal	government,	and	in	particular	within	the
presidency.	
[176]
		Putin	was	named	Time’s	‘Person	of	the	Year’	in	2007.
[177]
		In	late	2004	and	early	2005,	large	Western-backed	protests

in	Ukraine	following	the	national	elections,	which	resulted	in
Viktor	 Yushchenko	 becoming	 President	 instead	 of	 Viktor
Yanukovich,	 who	 was	 the	 more	 pro-Russian	 candidate.
Orange	was	the	colour	of	Yushchenko’s	campaign,	hence	the
name.	As	with	the	Rose	Revolution	in	Georgia	the	previous
year,	 in	 Russia	 this	 was	 seen	 as	 another	 attempt	 by	 the
Western	powers	to	weaken	Russia’s	power	within	its	sphere
of	influence.
[178]
	 	 Michael	 Hardt	 &	 Antonio	 Negri,	Empire	 (Cambridge,
Massachusetts:	Harvard	University	Press,	2000).
[179]
		The	philosophers	Gilles	Deleuze	and	Félix	Guattari	used	the
term	 ‘rhizome’	 and	 ‘rhizomatic’	 to	 describe	 concepts	 that
allow	for	multiple,	non-hierarchical	entry	and	exit	points	in
their	interpretation.
[180]
	 	 Viktor	 Chernomyrdin	 (1938-2010)	 founded	 Gazprom,
which	 is	 the	 state-owned	 natural	 gas	 company,	 and	 was
Deputy	Prime	Minister	for	energy	resources	from	1992	until
1998.
[181]
		Georgy	Satarov	(b.	1947)	was	an	advisor	to	Yeltsin.	Since
then	 he	 has	 been	 involved	 in	 political	 groups	 opposed	 to
Putin.
[182]
		Latin,	denoting	those	who	refuse	to	engage	with	politics.
[183]
		Italian:	‘good	life’.

[184]
		In	2008,	during	Medvedev’s	administration,	he	declared	a
programme	to	train	of	a	reserve	of	administrative	personnel
for	 all	 the	 levels	 of	 government.	 The	 most	 successful
administrators,	 he	 said,	 would	 be	 included	 in	 a	 database
called	the	‘President’s	thousand’	so	that	they	could	be	made
available	for	recruiting	when	needed.
[185]
		Leonid	Nevzlin	(b.	1959)	was	a	senior	executive	at	Yukos
who	has	since	left	Russia	for	Israel.	In	2008	he	was	found
guilty	on	several	counts	of	murder	in	Russia,	and	the	Russian
government	continues	to	seek	his	extradition.
[186]
		Alexander	Lebedev	(b.	1959),	a	former	KGB	agent,	was
one	of	the	richest	oligarchs	in	Russia	in	the	late	1990s	and
2000s,	although	his	businesses	have	suffered	many	setbacks
recently	and	since	2012	he	has	declined	considerably.
[187]
		Oleg	Deripaska	(b.	1968)	is	a	successful	businessman	and
one	of	the	richest	individuals	in	Russia.
[188]
	 	 Friedrich	 Ratzel	 (1844-1904)	 was	 a	 German	 geographer
and	ethnologist	who	attempted	to	merge	the	two	disciplines,
and	is	regarded	as	the	first	German	geopolitical	thinker.
[189]
		Rudolf	Kjellén	(1864-1922)	was	a	political	scientist	and
also	served	in	the	Swedish	Parliament	as	a	conservative.	A
student	of	Ratzel,	he	further	developed	the	latter’s	ideas,	and
his	conception	of	geopolitics	was	to	be	very	influential	on

Haushofer	and	the	German	geopolitical	theorists.
[190]
	 	 Sir	 Halford	 Mackinder	 	 (1861-1947)	 was	 an	 English
geographer,	 and	 also	 Director	 of	 the	 London	 School	 of
Economics.	 A	 pioneer	 who	 established	 geography	 as	 an
academic	 discipline,	 he	 is	 also	 regarded	 as	 the	 father	 of
geopolitics.
[191]
	 	 Zbigniew	 Brzezinski,	The	 Grand	 Chessboard:	American
Primacy	 and	 its	 Geostrategic	 Imperatives	(New	 York:
BasicBooks,	1997).
[192]
	 	The	 Council	 on	 Foreign	 Relations	 is	 a	 privately-owned
political	think	tank	in	the	United	States,	which	has	its	origins
in	the	peace	process	at	the	end	of	the	First	World	War.	The
CFR	 claims	 that	 it	 seeks	 to	 influence	 global	 politics	 in	 a
direction	 that	 provides	 peaceful	 conflict	 resolutions	 and
multilateralism..
[193]
		Samuel	Huntington	(1927-2008)	was	an	American	political
scientist	who	was	well-known	for	his	1993	essay	‘The	Clash
of	Civilizations’	published	in	Foreign	Affairs,	which	was	later
expanded	 into	 a	 book	 of	 the	 same	 name,	 in	 which	 he
theorised	 that	 the	 changing	 world	 order	 following	 the
collapse	 of	 Communism	 would	 be	 defined	 by	 conflicts
between	 cultural	 blocs,	 such	 as	 the	 West	 and	 the	 Islamic
world.
[194]
		Yves	Lacoste	(b.	1929)	has	written	many	works	pertaining

to	 geopolitics,	 and	 is	 the	 head	 of	 the	 French	 Institute	 for
Geopolitics.
[195]
		Karl	Haushofer	(1869-1946)	was	a	German	General	who
helped	to	establish	geopolitics	as	a	discipline	in	Germany.
[196]
	 	 Pierre	 Béhar,	Une	 géopolitique	 pour	 l’Europe:	Vers	 une
nouvelle	Eurasie?	(Paris:	Editions	Desjonqueres,	1992).
[197]
		Pierre	Gallois	(1911-2010)	was	a	Brigadier	General	in	the
French	Air	Force.	After	serving	in	the	Second	World	War	as	a
bomber	crewman	in	the	Royal	Air	Force,	he	worked	in	the
French	Ministry	of	Defence,	and	was	instrumental	in	France’s
decision	to	develop	its	own	nuclear	arsenal.	He	later	became
known	 for	 his	 geopolitics,	 and	 strongly	 opposed	 NATO’s
intervention	in	Serbia	during	the	1990s.
[198]
	 	 Pierre	 Gallois,	Géopolitique:	 Les	 voies	 de	 la	 puissance
(Paris:	Plon,	1990).
[199]
		George	Soros	(b.	1930)	is	an	American	billionaire	who	uses
his	 wealth	 to	 promote	 liberal	 causes	 around	 the	 world.	 He
funded	 many	 dissident	 groups	 in	 Eastern	 Europe	 and	 the
USSR	 during	 the	 Cold	 War,	 and	 continues	 to	 support
democratic	causes	there.	Critics	have	said	that	Soros	is	merely
acting	as	an	agent	of	American	foreign	policy	interests.
[200]
		The	Project	for	the	New	American	Century	was	a	private
institute	established	in	1997	which	served	as	a	mouthpiece

for	neoconservative	thought	until	it	was	disbanded	in	2006.
The	Project	sought	to	develop	ways	to	maintain	and	extend
American	supremacy	into	the	twenty-first	century,	and	many
of	 its	 members	 were	 either	 part	 of	 or	 influential	 upon	 the
administration	of	President	George	W.	Bush.
[201]
	 	 Eduard	 Shevardnadze	 (1928-2014)	 was	 the	 President	 of
Georgia	from	1992	until	2003,	when	he	was	deposed	during
the	Rose	Revolution.
[202]
		Interview	in	Kommersant,	30	August	2010.-AD
[203]
		Shamil	Basayev	(1965-2006)	was	the	leader	of	the	radical
Islamist	faction	of	the	Chechen	guerrillas.	He	fought	in	both
Chechen	 wars,	 and	 also	 fought	 against	 the	 Georgian
government	in	the	early	1990s.
[204]
		The	Bush	administration	unveiled	this	plan	in	2004	before
the	G8	summit	as	a	40-year	plan	to	democratise	the	Middle
East.	It	drew	widespread	criticism,	not	least	because	none	of
the	nations	it	sought	to	transform	were	consulted.
[205]
	 	 Eduard	 Kokoity	 (b.	 1964)	 was	 the	 President	 of	 South
Ossetia	 from	 2001	 until	 2011.	 He	 strongly	 opposed
reunification	 of	 South	 Ossetia	 with	 Georgia,	 believing	 it
should	end	up	as	part	of	Russia.
[206]
	 	 Sergei	 Bagapsh	 (1949-2011)	 was	 the	 President	 of	 the
Republic	of	Abkhazia	from	2005	until	his	death.	Previously

he	had	been	Prime	Minister.
[207]
		Interview	in	Kommersant,	30	August	2010.-AD
[208]
	 	 Putin	 made	 this	 statement	 at	 a	 press	 conference	 at	 the
Kremlin	on	31	January	2006.
[209]
		A	Russian	metaphor	for	those	living	in	the	wealthy	nations
of	the	West.
[210]
	 	 ‘Vladimir	 Putin:	To	 the	 Critics	We	 Reply:	 Screw	You’,
Komsomolskaya	Pravda,	2	February	2006.-AD
[211]
		Classical	Greek:	‘place’.
[212]
	 	 In	The	 Fourth	 Political	Theory	 (London:	Arktos,	 2012)
Dugin	writes:	‘The	“large	space”	is	a	different	name	for	that
which	 we	 understand	 by	 “civilisation”	 in	 its	 geopolitical,
spatial	 and	 cultural	 senses.	The	 “large	 space”	 differs	 from
other	existing	national	governments	precisely	in	that	it	is	built
on	the	foundation	of	a	common	value	system	and	historical
kinship,	 and	 it	 also	 unifies	 a	 few	 or	 even	 a	 multitude	 of
different	 governments,	 tied	 together	 by	 a	 “community	 of
fate”.’
[213]
		The	Eurasian	Customs	Union	was	established	in	1995	as	an
attempt	to	unite	the	countries	that	were	formerly	part	of	the
Soviet	Union	into	an	economic	bloc	along	the	lines	of	the
European	Union.	It	currently	consists	of	Russia,	Belarus,	and
Kazakhstan,	but	Russia	hopes	to	eventually	add	many	other

nations.		The	catalyst	for	the	Maidan	revolution	in	Ukraine
occurred	 when	 Ukrainian	 President	 Viktor	 Yanukovych
ended	 efforts	 to	 integrate	 into	 the	 EU	 in	 favour	 of	 the
Customs	Union.
[214]
		I	mean	the	formula	‘Orthodoxy,	autocracy	and	nationality’,
an	 ideological	 basis	 of	 the	 ‘theory	 of	 official	 nationality’,
proclaimed	 in	 1832.	 Its	 author	 was	 Count	 Sergei
Semionovich	Uvarov	(1786-1855),	Deputy	Minister	of	Public
Education,	responsible	for	the	ideological	backing	of	the	rule
of	Nicholas	I,	eradicating	the	Decembrists’	heritage.-AD
[215]
		Prince	Nikolai	Trubetzkoy	(1890-1938)	was	a	linguist	and
historian	who	left	Russia	following	the	Russian	Revolution.
Trubetzkoy	 believed	 that	 Eurasia	 formed	 a	 unity,	 even
though	 it	 was	 divided	 politically,	 and	 laid	 some	 of	 the
theoretical	 groundwork	 for	 the	 Eurasian	 movement	 of	 the
time.	 His	 seminal	 essay	 on	 Eurasianism,	 ‘Europe	 and
Mankind’,	is	available	in	English	in	Nikolai	Trubetzkoy,	The
Legacy	 of	 Genghis	 Khan	 and	 Other	 Essays	 on	 Russia’s
Identity	(Ann	Arbor:	Michigan	Slavic	Publications,	1991).
[216]
		Pyotr	Nikolaevich	Savitsky	(1895-1968)	was	an	economist
and	 a	 philosopher	 who	 belonged	 to	 the	 White	 Russian
movement.	 He	 was	 also	 one	 of	 the	 leading	 figures	 of	 the
original	Eurasianist	movement.	An	excerpt	from	one	of	his
Eurasianist	essays	is	available	in	English	at	The	Soul	of	the

East	Website,	souloftheeast.org/2014/02/22/the-eurasianist-
worldview/.
[217]
	 	 Nikolai	 Alexevey	 was	 an	 attorney	 associated	 with	 the
Eurasianists.
[218]
	 	 Alexander	 Dugin,	The	 Fundamentals	 of	 Geopolitics
(Moscow:	 Arctogaia,	 1997).-AD	 (No	 English	 translation
exists.-Ed.)
[219]
	 	 Alexander	 Dugin,	The	 Philosophy	 of	 Politics	 (Moscow:
Arctogaia,	2004).-AD	(No	English	translation	exists.-Ed.)
[220]
		Jean	Parvulesco	(1929-2010)	was	a	Romanian	writer	who
fled	to	France	following	the	Communist	takeover.	He	was	a
traditionalist	 and	 esotericist,	 He	 was	 close	 to	 Alain	 de
Benoist’s	GRECE,	In	his	geopolitical	writings	he	called	for	an
axis	 between	 Paris,	 Berlin	 and	 Moscow	 to	 be	 formed	 to
counter	Anglo-Saxon	hegemony.
[221]
		Jean	Parvulesco,	Vladimir	Putin	and	the	Eurasian	Empire
(St.	Petersburg:	Amphora,	2003).-AD	(No	English	translation
exists.-Ed.)
[222]
	 	 Federal	 Security	 Service,	 the	 counter-intelligence	 and
internal	security	service	of	the	Russian	Federation.
[223]
	 	 Alexander	 Dugin,	Conspirology	 (Moscow:	 Arctogaia,
1993).-AD	(No	English	translation	exists,-Ed.)
[224]
	 	 René	 Guénon	 (1886-1951)	 was	 a	 French	 writer	 who

founded	 what	 has	 come	 to	 be	 known	 as	 the	 traditionalist
school	 of	 religious	 thought.	 Traditionalism	 calls	 for	 a
rejection	of	the	modern	world	and	its	philosophies	in	favour
of	a	return	to	the	spirituality	and	ways	of	living	of	the	past.
His	 central	 works	 are	The	Crisis	of	the	Modern	World	 and
The	Reign	of	Quantity	and	the	Signs	of	the	Times.
[225]
		Julius	Evola	(1898-1974)	was	the	most	important	Italian
member	of	the	traditionalist	school,	which	is	to	say	that	he
opposed	modernity	in	favour	of	an	approach	to	life	consistent
with	the	teachings	of	the	ancient	sacred	texts.	His	main	work
is	Revolt	against	the	Modern	World.
[226]
	 	Titus	 Burckhardt	 (1908-1984)	 was	 a	 Swiss	 German	 art
historian	who	also	participated	in	the	traditionalist	school.
[227]
		Leopold	Ziegler	(1881-1958)	was	a	German	philosopher.
Although	 not	 strictly	 part	 of	 the	 traditionalist	 school,	 his
thought	did	bear	similarities	to	theirs,	and	he	was	in	contact
with	 representatives	 of	 the	 school	 as	 well	 as	 with	 the
Conservative	Revolutionaries.
[228]
		A	congregation	of	Old	Believers.-AD
[229]
	 	 Jürgen	 Habermas	 (b.	 1929)	 is	 a	 German	 Marxist
philosopher.
[230]
	 	 Samuel	 Johnson	 (1709-1784)	 was	 an	 English	 poet	 and
essayist.	 According	 to	 his	 friend	 and	 biographer	 James

Boswell,	Johnson	once	said,	‘Patriotism	is	the	last	refuge	of
the	scoundrel.’
[231]
		Friedrich	von	List	(1789-1846)	was	a	German	philosopher
and	economist.
[232]
		Sergei	Witte	(1849-1915)	was	an	advisor	to	the	last	two
Tsars	of	Russia.	He	oversaw	the	industrialisation	of	Russia
and	 was	 the	 author	 of	 the	 1905	 October	 Manifesto,	 which
was	written	in	response	to	the	Revolution	of	1905	and	the
subsequent	 need	 for	 democratic	 reforms,	 and	 was	 the
precursor	to	the	Russian	Empire’s	constitution.
[233]
	 	 Conciliarism	 in	 Orthodoxy	 refers	 to	 the	 belief	 that	 the
Church	should	be	governed	by	a	council	of	bishops,	rather
by	a	single	one.
[234]
		Catholic	social	teaching	addresses	issues	related	to	social
justice,	 opposing	 capitalism	 and	 socialism	 in	 favour	 of
distributism.	It	originated	in	Pope	Leo	XIII’s	Rerum	Novarum
encyclical	of	1891.
[235]
		Ernst	Niekisch	(1889-1967)	was	a	German	politician	who
was	initially	a	Communist,	but	by	the	1920s	sought	to	merge
Communism	 with	 nationalism.	 He	 published	 a	 journal,
Widerstand	 [Resistance],	 and	 applied	 the	 term	 National
Bolshevik	to	himself	and	his	followers.	He	rejected	National
Socialism	as	insufficiently	socialist,	and	was	imprisoned	by
them	 in	 1937,	 and	 was	 blinded	 under	 torture.	 Upon	 his

release	in	1945,	he	supported	the	Soviet	Union	and	moved	to
East	 Germany,	 but	 became	 disillusioned	 by	 the	 Soviets’
treatment	of	workers	and	returned	to	the	West	in	1953.
[236]
		Fritz	Wolffheim	(1888-1942),	a	Communist,	was	one	of	the
first	to	develop	the	idea	of	National	Bolshevism	in	1919.	He
later	became	involved	with	a	nationalist	organisation	called
the	 League	 for	 the	 Study	 of	 German	 Communism,	 which
included	some	National	Socialists,	although	Wolffheim,	being
of	 Jewish	 descent,	 was	 unable	 to	 make	 much	 of	 these
connections.	  He	  was	  imprisoned	  in	  Ravensbrück
concentration	camp	in	1936	and	died	there.
[237]
		Heinrich	Laufenberg	(1872-1932)	was	a	former	Communist
who	 was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 politicians	 to	 formulate	 National
Bolshevism	in	Germany	in	1919.
[238]
		Georges	Sorel	(1847-1922)	was	a	French	philosopher	who
began	 as	 a	 Marxist	 and	 later	 developed	 Revolutionary
Syndicalism.	 He	 advocated	 the	 use	 of	 myth	 and	 organised
violence	 in	 revolutionary	 movements.	 He	 was	 influential
upon	both	the	Communist	and	Fascist	movements.
[239]
	 	 Georges	 Sorel,	Reflections	 on	 Violence	 (Cambridge:
Cambridge	University	Press,	1999).
[240]
	 	 Nikolai	 Ustrialov	 (1890-1937)	 was	 a	 professor	 and
Slavophile	who	fled	the	Soviet	Union	following	the	Russian

Revolution	 and	 joined	 the	 anti-Soviet	 White	 movement.
Originally	opposed	to	Communism,	he	later	sought	a	fusion
of	elements	of	Soviet	Communism	with	Russian	nationalism.
He	 returned	 to	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 in	 1935,	 believing	 that
National	 Bolshevik	 ideas	 were	 becoming	 more	 acceptable,
but	 was	 charged	 with	 espionage	 and	 executed	 in	 1937,
during	the	Great	Purge.
[241]
		Ernst	Jünger	(1895-1998)	was	one	of	the	most	prominent	of
the	German	Conservative	Revolutionaries,	but	that	was	only
one	phase	in	a	long	and	varied	career.	He	volunteered	for	and
fought	in	the	German	Army	throughout	the	First	World	War,
and	was	awarded	the	highest	decoration,	the	Pour	le	Mérite,
for	 his	 service.	After	 the	 war,	 he	 wrote	 many	 books	 and
novels,	 was	 active	 in	 German	 politics,	 experimented	 with
psychedelic	 drugs,	 and	 travelled	 the	 world.	 He	 remained
ambivalent	about	National	Socialism	at	first,	but	never	joined
the	Party,	and	he	had	turned	against	the	Nazis	by	the	late
1930s.	He	rejoined	the	Wehrmacht	at	the	outbreak	of	war,
however,	and	remained	in	Paris	as	a	captain,	where	he	spent
more	 time	 with	 Picasso	 and	 Cocteau	 than	 enforcing	 the
occupation.	His	objections	to	the	Nazis	were	influential	upon
the	members	of	the	Stauffenberg	plot	to	assassinate	Hitler	in
July	1944,	which	led	to	his	dismissal	from	the	Wehrmacht.
After	 the	 war,	 Jünger’s	 political	 views	 gradually	 moved
toward	a	sort	of	aristocratic	anarchism.	His	brother,	Friedrich

Jünger	(1898-1977)	was	also	a	veteran	of	the	First	World	War
and	 participated	 in	 the	 Conservative	 Revolution,	 and	 also
became	a	writer	and	philosopher.
[242]
		Carl	Schmitt	(1888-1985)	was	an	important	German	jurist
who	 wrote	 about	 political	 science,	 geopolitics	 and
constitutional	 law.	 He	 was	 part	 of	 the	 Conservative
Revolutionary	movement	of	the	Weimar	era.	He	also	briefly
supported	 the	 National	 Socialists	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 their
regime,	although	they	later	turned	against	him.	He	remains
highly	influential	in	the	fields	of	law	and	philosophy.
[243]
		Oswald	Spengler	(1880-1936)	was	a	German	philosopher
who	 is	 regarded	 as	 one	 of	 the	 principal	 Conservative
Revolutionary	figures	of	the	Weimar	period	in	Germany.	His
most	important	work	was	his	two-volume	1922/23	book,	The
Decline	 of	 the	 West,	 in	 which	 he	 theorised	 that	 all
civilisations	go	through	an	inevitable	cycle	of	ages	of	rise	and
decline	in	power,	with	the	present	age	of	the	West	currently
entering	its	declining	period.
[244]
		Werner	Sombart	(1863-1941)	was	a	German	economist	and
sociologist	who	was	very	much	opposed	to	capitalism	and
democracy.
[245]
	 	 Othmar	 Spann	 (1878-1950)	 was	 an	 Austrian	 Catholic
philosopher	and	economist	who	held	neoconservative	views
based	on	the	ideals	of	German	Romanticism.	He	is	credited

with	developing	the	idea	of	the	corporate	state,	which	was
soon	 to	 become	 so	 integral	 to	 Fascism,	 and	 which	 Spann
believed	 could	 be	 applied	 everywhere	 for	 the	 benefit	 of
humanity.	 In	 spite	 of	 this,	 he	 did	 not	 support	 National
Socialism,	and	he	was	imprisoned	after	the	Anschluss	in	1938
and	forbidden	to	teach	at	the	University	of	Vienna	(where
had	 had	 taught	 since	 1919).	 He	 attempted	 to	 return	 to
teaching	after	1945,	but	was	again	rejected.
[246]
		Friedrich	Hielscher	(1902-1990)	was	a	German	thinker	who
was	involved	in	the	Conservative	Revolution	and	who	was	an
active	neo-pagan	throughout	his	life.	He	participated	in	the
anti-Nazi	resistance	during	the	Third	Reich.
[247]
		Kievan	Rus’	was	a	loose	tribal	confederation	that	had	its
capital	 in	 Kiev,	 and	 from	 which	 the	 modern-day	 states	 of
Russia,	Ukraine	and	Belarus	are	descended.	It	lasted	from	the
tenth	until	the	thirteenth	centuries.
[248]
	 	 Pyotr	Aven	 (b.	 1955)	 is	 a	 businessman	 who	 served	 as
Minister	 of	 Foreign	 Economic	 Relations	 and	 as	 Russia’s
representative	to	the	G7	in	1992-92.	Today	he	is	the	head	of
Alfa-Bank,	which	is	Russia’s	largest	commercial	bank.
[249]
		The	IBM	386	model	was	first	developed	in	the	mid-1980s.
[250]
		The	title	of	the	leader	of	the	Communist	Party	during	the
Soviet	era.

[251]
		Geoffrey	Hosking,	Rulers	and	Victims:	The	Russians	in	the
Soviet	 Union	 (Cambridge,	 Massachusetts:	 Belknap	 Press,
2006).
[252]
		Novalis,	the	pen	name	of	Georg	Philipp	Friedrich	Freiherr
von	Hardenberg	(1772-1801),	was	a	poet	and	philosopher.
Novalis	says	this	in	his	poem	‘When	Geometric	Diagrams...’.
[253]
		In	the	philosophy	of	Logical	Atomism,	an	atomic	fact	is	the
simplest	type	of	fact,	consisting	of	a	quality	in	some	specific,
individual	 thing,	 such	 as	 a	 thing’s	 color.	 Under	 the
assumption	that	language	mirrors	reality,	it	can	be	proposed
that	the	world	is	composed	of	facts	that	are	utterly	simple	and
comprehensible.
[254]
		The	Eurasia	Party,	established	in	2002,	is	the	political	arm
of	the	Eurasia	Movement.
[255]
	 	 GUAM	 stands	 for	 Georgia,	 Ukraine,	 Azerbaijan,	 and
Moldova.	 It	 was	 established	 in	 2001	 as	 a	 means	 of
accelerating	 democratic	 and	 economic	 reforms	 in	 these
countries,	and	of	creating	the	basis	for	eventual	integration
with	Europe.	In	Russia	it	is	seen	as	an	American-backed	plot
to	attempt	to	take	these	countries	out	of	Russia’s	economic
orbit,	 since	 the	 CIS	 also	 wishes	 to	 see	 these	 nations
reintegrated	with	Russia.
[256]
	 	 The	 CSTO	 was	 formed	 in	 1992	 as	 a	 military	 alliance

between	 the	 CIS	 states	 of	 Russia,	 Armenia,	 Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan,	Tajikistan,	and	Uzbekistan.	Azerbaijan,	Georgia,
and	Uzbekistan	subsequently	withdrew.
[257]
		The	SCO	was	formed	in	2001	as	a	military	and	economic
alliance	 between	 China,	 Russia,	 Kazakhstan,	 Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan,	and	Uzbekistan.
[258]
	 	 The	 CFMZ	 is	 an	 economic	 cooperation	 treaty	 between
Russia,	Belarus	and	Kazakhstan.
[259]
	 	 An	 English	 translation	 of	 this	 article	 is	 available	 at
www.russianmission.eu/en/news/article-prime-minister-
vladimir-putin-new-integration-project-eurasia-future-
making-izvestia-3-.
[260]
		Sergei	Lavrov	(b.	1950)	has	been	the	Foreign	Minister	of
Russia	since	2004.
[261]
		Robert	Cooper	(b.	1947)	is	a	former	British	diplomat	who
subsequently	worked	for	the	European	Union	and	currently	is
a	member	of	the	European	Council	on	Foreign	Relations.	On
7	 April	 2002	 he	 published	 an	 essay,	 ‘The	 New	 Liberal
Imperialism’,	in	The	Guardian	in	which	he	discusses	the	idea
of	 the	 ‘postmodern	 state’.	 The	 full	 text	 is	 available	 at	
www.theguardian.com/world/2002/apr/07/1.
[262]
		The	Thirty	Years’	War	ended	with	the	Peace	of	Westphalia
in	 1648,	 in	 which	 the	 nations	 of	 Europe	 recognised	 each

others’	territorial	integrity.	Some	historians	consider	it	to	have
been	 the	 first	 step	 in	 the	 development	 of	 the	 modern-day
system	of	international	relations.
[263]
		Lev	Gumilev	(1912-1992)	was	a	Soviet	anthropologist	who
attempted	 to	 explain	 ethnic	 differences	 through	 geological
factors,	 especially	 in	 his	 book	 Ethnogenesis	 and	 the
Biosphere	(Moscow:	Progress	Publishers,	1990).	He	has	been
very	influential	on	modern	Eurasianism.
[264]
		A	condition	without	which	something	cannot	exist.
[265]
		Nazarbayev	outlined	the	idea	for	a	Eurasian	Union	in	a
speech	he	delivered	at	Moscow	University	in	May	1994.
[266]
	 	 Konstantin	 Leontiev	 (1831-1891)	 was	 a	 conservative
philosopher	 who	 opposed	 democracy	 and	 liberalism.	 He
believed	that	an	alliance	between	Russia	and	Eastern	nations
such	 as	 India	 and	 China	 could	 help	 to	 ward	 off	Western
influences.	 He	 described	 ‘flourishing	 complexity’	 as	 the
second	phase	in	the	historical	cycle	of	a	civilisation	in	his
book	The	East,	Russia,	and	Slavdom	(no	English	translation
exists).
[267]
		The	Mishar	Tatars	are	a	subgroup	of	the	Volga	Tatars.
[268]
		The	Kryashens	are	Tatars	who	are	a	subgroup	of	the	Volga
Tatars.	Unlike	most	Tatars	they	are	Orthodox	Christians.
[269]
		The	document	was	leaked	to	The	New	York	Times,	which

led	to	an	article,	‘U.S.	Strategy	Plan	Calls	for	Insuring	No
Rivals	Develop’	by	Patrick	E	Tyler,	published	on	8	March
1992.	   The	    article	    is	    available	    at
www.nytimes.com/1992/03/08/world/us-strategy-plan-calls-
for-insuring-no-rivals-develop.html.	The	 document	 came	 to
be	known	as	the	‘Wolfowitz	Doctrine’,	and	came	to	be	seen
as	an	early	statement	of	neoconservative	thought	on	foreign
policy	and	a	forerunner	of	the	policies	that	were	later	adopted
by	the	George	W.	Bush	administration.
[270]
		Putin	used	this	phrase	in	conjunction	with	a	suggestion	for
a	 free	 trade	 agreement	 between	 Russia	 and	 Europe	 in	 an
editorial	 published	 in	 the	Süddeutsche	 Zeitung	 on	 23
November	2010.
[271]
	 	 Classical	 Greek:	 ‘idea’,	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 an	 ordering
principle.
[272]
		Arnold	J.	Toynbee	(1889-1975)	was	a	British	historian	who
wrote	 a	 12-volume	 study	 of	 the	 cycles	 of	 civilisations,	A
Study	of	History,	between	1934	and	1961.
[273]
		Claude	Lévi-Strauss	(1908-2009)	was	the	most	influential
anthropologist	of	the	twentieth	century.
[274]
		Roman	Jakobson	(1896-1982)	was	a	Russian	linguist	who
was	 one	 of	 the	 founders	 of	 what	 came	 to	 be	 called
structuralism.	 He	 fled	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 just	 prior	 to	 the
Second	World	War	and	lived	for	the	remainder	of	his	life	in

the	United	States.
[275]
		According	to	Lev	Gumilev,	in	ancient	Mongol	civilisation,
warriors	 who	 were	 dissatisfied	 with	 being	 subject	 to	 the
authority	of	the	elders	of	their	tribes	would	sometimes	leave
the	 tribe	 and	 go	 off	 on	 their	 own,	 becoming	 known	 as
‘people	of	long	will’.
[276]
		Gumilev	termed	those	in	an	ethnic	group	who	possess	a
drive	to	expand	their	group	‘passionaries’.	Sub-passionaries
are	those	who	lack	this	drive.
[277]
		Vilfredo	Pareto	(1844-1923)	was	an	Italian	sociologist	and
economist	whose	theories	were	highly	influential	upon	Italian
Fascism.	Dugin	is	referring	to	the	ideas	he	discusses	in	The
Rise	 and	 Fall	 of	 the	 Elites:	An	Application	 of	Theoretical
Sociology	 (Totowa,	 New	 Jersey:	 Bedminster	 Press,	 1968).
According	 to	 Pareto,	 elites	 are	 never	 overthrown	 by	 the
peoples	they	govern,	but	rather	are	displaced	by	another	elite.
[278]
		Ivan	IV,	or	Ivan	the	Terrible	(1530-1584),	was	Tsar	from
1547	 until	 his	 death.	 Conquering	 much	 territory	 and
instituting	many	reforms,	Ivan	was	the	forger	of	the	Russian
Empire.
[279]
		The	oprichnina	were	a	secret	police	created	to	repress	the
aristocracy	between	1565	and	1572.
[280]
		Tantra	is	a	school	of	esotericism	in	Hinduism.	Shaivites	are

worshippers	of	the	god	Shiva.
[281]
		The	Janissaries	were	the	elite	troops	of	the	Ottoman	Empire.
[282]
		Sufism	refers	to	the	various	schools	of	esotericism	which
are	part	of	Islamic	culture.	The	Bektashi	Order	of	Sufis	had
close	ties	to	the	Janissaries.	For	centuries	of	Ottoman	history,
any	 Sultan	 that	 tried	 to	 disband	 the	 Janissaries	 would	 be
overthrown	 by	 them,	 until	 they	 were	 finally	 defeated	 by
Mahmud	II	in	1826.
[283]
	 	 Sublime	 Porte	 refers	 to	 the	 government	 of	 the	 Ottoman
Empire.
[284]
	 	 In	 2004,	 Putin	 changed	 the	 laws	 so	 that	 the	 regional
governors	 were	 chosen	 by	 the	 President,	 subject	 to	 the
approval	 of	 the	 regional	 legislatures,	 rather	 than	 through
direct	elections.
[285]
		A	costal	city	in	Vietnam.
[286]
		Valentin	Yudashkin	(b.	1963)	is	a	fashion	designer.
[287]
		Yudashkin	was	hired	by	the	Russian	military	to	design	new
uniforms	for	its	forces.	He	designed	85	new	uniforms	in	all,
However,	 when	 Russian	 soldiers	 wore	 the	 new	 uniforms
during	 the	 winter,	 hundreds	 of	 them	 fell	 sick,	 which	 was
blamed	on	the	uniforms	being	too	thin.	Yudashkin	responded
by	claiming	that	the	military	had	changed	the	designs	without
his	approval	and	had	altered	the	materials	the	uniforms	were

made	from.
[288]
		Medvedev	announced	the	creation	of	the	Centre	in	2009
with	 the	 intention	 that	 it	 would	 serve	 as	 a	 means	 of
encouraging	 and	 marketing	 new	 developments	 in	 Russian
science	 and	 technology.	As	 of	 this	 writing	 it	 is	 still	 under
development.
[289]
	 	 Elvira	 Nabiullina	 (b.	 1963)	 is	 an	 economist	 who	 was
Minister	 of	 Economic	 Development	 and	Trade	 from	 2007
until	 2012,	 and	 was	 then	 an	 economic	 advisor	 to	 Putin
following	his	re-election	from	2012	until	2013.	After	that	she
was	appointed	the	Governor	of	the	Central	Bank	of	Russia,
becoming	the	first	woman	in	the	G8.
[290]
	 	 Mikhail	 Zurabov	 (b.	 1953)	 was	 Minister	 of	 Health	 and
Social	 Development	 between	 2004	 and	 2007.	 In	 2005	 he
suggested	the	monetisation	of	benefits	for	the	elderly,	which
led	to	protests	all	over	Russia.	He	currently	serves	as	Russia’s
ambassador	to	Ukraine.
[291]
		In	September	2011	the	European	Commission	carried	out
unannounced	inspections	of	Gazprom’s	facilities	in	Europe,
alleging	 violations	 of	 the	 EU’s	 antitrust	 laws	 by	 hindering
competition	 in	 the	 Central	 and	 Eastern	 European	 markets.
The	 European	 Commission	 later	 made	 formal	 accusations
against	Gazprom.
[292]
		Alexander	Litvinenko	(1962-2006)	was	a	former	agent	of

the	FSB	who	fled	to	England	after	making	accusations	against
the	FSB	and	Putin	personally	for	their	alleged	role	in	many
criminal	acts,	including	the	Russian	apartment	bombings	of
1999.	In	November	2006	he	was	poisoned	and	died	shortly
thereafter.
[293]
		In	September	1993,	the	differences	between	Yeltsin	and	the
Parliament	became	so	severe,	particularly	over	the	issue	of
economic	 reforms,	 that	 Yeltsin	 attempted	 to	 dissolve	 it,
despite	the	fact	that	he	had	no	constitutional	authority	to	do
so.	Many	representatives	barricaded	themselves	in	the	White
House	 and	 other	 government	 buildings,	 and	 protestors
surrounded	 the	 buildings	 to	 support	 them,	 Finally	 Yeltsin
ordered	tanks	to	fire	on	the	White	House,	which	was	done,
and	 shortly	 thereafter	 the	 Russian	 military	 occupied	 the
building.	Hundreds	were	killed	or	injured	in	the	fighting.
[294]
	 	 In	 August	 2008,	 the	 Georgian	 government	 attacked
Tskhinvali	 in	 South	 Ossetia	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 securing
their	control	over	the	region,	This	led	to	Russian	intervention
and	the	2008	South	Ossetia	War.
[295]
		In	pre-Revolutionary	France,	the	general	assembly	of	the
French	government	was	divided	into	three	States-General:	the
clergy	 (First),	 the	 nobles	 (Second),	 and	 the	 commoners
(Third).
[296]
	 	 Ernest	 Gellner	 (1925-1995)	 was	 a	 British-Czech

philosopher	 and	 anthropologist.	 Dugin	 is	 referring	 to
Gellner’s	Nations	and	Nationalism	(Ithaca:	Cornell	University
Press,	1983)	in	which	he	argued	that	the	nation-state	is	purely
a	product	of	modernity.
[297]
		Benedict	Anderson	(b.	1936)	likewise	makes	the	argument
that	 nationalism	 and	 modernity	 are	 linked	 in	Imagined
Communities:	 Reflections	 on	 the	 Origin	 and	 Spread	 of
Nationalism	 (London:	 Verso,	 1991),	 although	 he	 sees	 the
nation-state	in	Europe	as	arising	as	an	imitation	of	the	rise	of
such	states	in	North	and	South	America.
[298]
		Latin:	‘economic	man’.
[299]
		The	Institute	was	inaugurated	by	Medvedev	in	2008	with
the	intention	of	introducing	modernising	reforms	into	Russia,
such	as	in	information	technology	and	civil	society.
[300]
		Igor	Yurgens	(b.	1952)	is	Vice	President	of	the	RUIE	and	is
Chairman	of	the	ICD.
[301]
		A	surface-to-air	missile.
[302]
		New	START	(Strategic	Arms	Reduction	Treaty)	was	signed
by	the	US	and	Russia	in	2010	with	the	intention	of	reducing
the	number	of	active	nuclear	warheads	possessed	by	both.
Some	in	the	Duma	objected	to	the	fact	that	the	treaty	placed
no	limitations	on	the	US’	stated	intention	of	building	ABM
sites.	

[303]
	 	 In	 2012	 the	 Russian	 government	 filed	 charges	 against
several	of	the	directors	at	Skolkovo,	alleging	that	they	had
embezzled	millions	of	rubles.
[304]
		The	balance	of	power	between	Medvedev	and	Putin	during
Medvedev’s	term	has	been	referred	to	as	the	‘tandem’.
[305]
		Yevgeny	Gontmakher	(b.	1953)	was	the	Vice	President	of
the	RUIE	and	is	currently	the	Deputy	Director	of	the	Institute
of	 World	 Economics	 and	 International	 Relations	 at	 the
Russian	Academy	of	Sciences.
[306]
		Alexei	Navalny	(b.	1976)	is	a	lawyer	who	is	one	of	the
most	prominent	critics	of	Putin,	and	the	Russian	government
more	 generally,	 today,	 In	 2012	 he	 was	 charged	 with
embezzlement.
[307]
	 	 Rodina	 (Motherland	 in	 Russian),	 or	 the	 Motherland-
National	 Patriotic	 Union,	 was	 established	 in	 2003	 as	 a
socialist	and	nationalist	party.
[308]
		The	Russian	Marches	are	an	annual	march	by	nationalists
which	takes	place	on	or	around	4	November,	Russia’s	Day	of
National	Unity.
[309]
		‘Tomorrow’.
[310]
		Manège	square	is	central	Moscow.	In	recent	years	it	has
become	 a	 site	 of	 rioting	 by	 football	 fans	 and	 of
demonstrations	by	nationalists.	In	December	2010	there	was

a	riot	involving	thousands	of	protesters	and	a	considerable
amount	of	violence,	and	since	then	Manège	has	come	to	be
associated	with	nationalism.
[311]
		Nikita	Mikhalkov	(b.	1945)	is	a	filmmaker	best	known	for
his	 1994	 anti-Stalinist	 film,	Burnt	 by	 the	 Sun.	 He	 is	 well-
known	as	a	Slavophile	and	nationalist	and	is	an	outspoken
supporter	of	Putin.
[312]
		Alexander	Potkin	(b.	1976)	was	the	leader	of	the	Movement
against	 Illegal	 Immigration.	 Known	 for	 its	 street-level
activism,	it	was	banned	in	2011.
[313]
		Dmitry	Dyomushkin	is	the	leader	of	the	Slavic	Union,	a
neo-Nazi	group	which	was	banned	in	2010.
[314]
		Stanislav	Belkovsky	(b.	1971)	is	a	Russian	political	analyst
and	a	cousin	to	Boris	Berezovsky.	He	is	the	head	of	the	think
tank,	the	National	Strategy	Institute,	and	is	a	critic	of	Putin.
[315]
		Yevgeny	Petrosyan	(b.	1945)	is	a	comedian	who	has	been
well-known	since	Soviet	times.
[316]
	 	Viktor	Yushchenko	 (b.	 1954)	 was	 President	 of	 Ukraine
from	2005	until	2010.	In	2004,	during	his	campaign,	he	was
poisoned,	which	horribly	scarred	his	face.	When	he	lost	the
initial	election,	widespread	allegations	of	voter	fraud	led	to
the	 Orange	 Revolution,	 which	 in	 turn	 led	 to	 a	 revote	 and
Yushchenko	becoming	President.

[317]
		Marat	Gelman	(b.	1960)	and	Pavlovsky	were	the	founders
of	the	Foundation	for	Effective	Politics,	which	is	a	think	tank
that	disseminates	media	related	to	Russian	politics,	and	was
active	in	the	Union	of	Right	Forces	in	the	late	1990s.	He	was
also	a	director	at	Channel	One.	Today	he	is	the	director	of	an
art	gallery	he	opened	in	Moscow.
[318]
	 	 Arkady	 Dvorkovich	 (b.	 1972)	 was	 an	 Assistant	 to	 the
President	 during	 Medvedev’s	 term.	 He	 is	 currently	 Deputy
Prime	Minister	in	Medvedev’s	cabinet.
[319]
		In	late	2011,	after	Putin	announced	his	candidacy	in	the
presidential	election,	protesters	began	to	wear	white	ribbons
in	opposition	to	what	they	believed	was	Putin’s	intention	of
stealing	the	election.
[320]
		Semyon	Marmeladov	is	a	character	in	Dostoevsky’s	Crime
and	Punishment.	An	alcoholic	who	has	squandered	all	of	his
family’s	money,	he	says	that	one	must	go	in	seek	of	a	loan
even	 knowing	 that	 it	 will	 be	 refused,	 because	 ‘there	 is
nowhere	 else	 to	 go’,	 and	 that	 sometimes	 a	 man	 must	 go
somewhere	since	all	men	need	someplace	to	go.
[321]
	 	This	 is	 a	 paraphrase	 of	 Mackinder’s	 original	 quotation,
‘Who	rules	East	Europe	commands	the	Heartland:	Who	rules
the	 Heartland	 commands	 the	World-Island:	Who	 rules	 the
World-Island	commands	the	world,’	in	Democratic	Ideals	and

Reality	(New	York:	Norton,	1962),	p.	150.
[322]
		Alexander	Shokhin	(b.	1951)	has	been	the	President	of	the
RUIE	since	2005	and	is	one	of	Russia’s	leading	industrialists.
[323]
		A	Caucasian	people	in	the	Dagestan	region.
[324]
		The	Kalmyks,	emigrated	from	Siberia	to	the	Volga	region
in	 the	 seventeenth	 century.	 Today	 it	 is	 the	 autonomous
Republic	 of	 Kalmykia,	 which	 is	 the	 only	 predominantly
Buddhist	country	in	Europe.
[325]
		Mikhail	Prokhorov	(b.	1965)	is	a	Russian	billionaire	who
ran	for	President	as	an	independent	in	2012.	He	owns	the
Brooklyn	Nets	basketball	team.
[326]
		Vladimir	Yakunin	(b.	1948)	has	been	head	of	the	state-
owned	Russian	Railways	since	2005.
[327]
		Viktor	Alexeevich	Zubkov	(b.	1941)	was	Prime	Minister	of
Russia	from	2007	until	2008	and	was	Putin’s	First	Deputy
Prime	Minister	during	Medvedev’s	term.		Putin	has	named
him	as	someone	who	could	possibly	be	elected	President.	He
is	also	the	Chairman	of	the	Board	of	Directors	of	Gazprom.
[328]
	 	 Bolotnaya	 is	 a	 square	 in	 central	 Moscow.	 In	 December
2011	 a	 large	 protest	 against	 what	 the	 protesters	 believed
would	be	unfair	electoral	practices	in	the	upcoming	elections
happened	there.
[329]
		Natalya	Timakova	(b.	1975)	is	a	Russian	journalist	who

was	 appointed	 Press	Attaché	 to	 Medvedev	 in	 2008.	 Since
2012	she	has	been	Medvedev’s	Press	Attaché	in	his	role	as
Prime	Minister.
[330]
		Antonio	Gramsci	(1891-1937)	was	an	Italian	Communist
who	was	imprisoned	by	the	Fascists.	He	developed	the	theory
of	cultural	hegemony,	which	(in	brief)	holds	that	a	political
group	 cannot	 maintain	 power	 without	 first	 persuading	 the
members	 of	 a	 society	 that	 the	 ideas	 it	 propagates	 are	 the
normal	 state	 of	 affairs,	 thus	 giving	 itself	 legitimacy.
Therefore,	control	over	the	cultural	apparatus	of	a	society	is	a
prerequisite	for	holding	power,	rather	than	being	something
which	follows	a	revolution.
[331]
	 	 Poklonnaya	 (‘Adoration’)	 Hill	 is	 the	 highest	 point	 in
Moscow	 and	 is	 the	 location	 of	 Victory	 Park,	 which
commemorates	 Russia’s	 victory	 in	 the	 Second	World	War.
On	4	February	2012,	just	before	the	presidential	election,	a
mass	rally	of	patriotic	and	nationalist	groups	was	held	there	in
opposition	 to	 the	 ‘orange’	 protests	 occurring	 at	 the	 time.
Dugin	himself	was	one	of	the	speakers.
[332]
		On	17	March	1991,	a	referendum	on	whether	or	not	the
Soviet	Union	should	be	preserved	was	held	throughout	the
nation.	70%	of	voters	elected	to	preserve	the	USSR,	with	a
voter	turnout	rate	of	80%.
[333]
		According	to	the	mathematician	Igor	Shafarevich,	who	also

writes	in	commentaries	on	Russia,	Russian	history	has	been
marked	 by	 an	 opposition	 between	 the	 ‘little	 people’,	 who
despise	 the	 morals	 and	 traditions	 of	 the	 majority,	 and	 the
‘great	 people’,	 which	 is	 the	 majority.	 He	 writes	 this	 in	 his
untranslated	book	Russophobia.
[334]
	 	 Hans	 Morgenthau	 (1904-1980)	 was	 a	 German-American
political	scientist	who	greatly	influenced	the	understanding	of
international	law	and	international	relations.	He	is	regarded	as
one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 thinkers	 in	 the	 school	 of
political	realist	thought.	According	to	him,	the	most	important
aspect	of	international	relations	is	how	nation-states	pursue
their	interests	in	terms	of	power.	He	believed	that	politics	had
immutable	laws	and	that	morality	could	not	be	applied	to	the
actions	of	states.
[335]
	 	 E	 H	 Carr	 (1892-1982)	 was	 an	 English	 historian	 and
international	 relations	 theorist.	 In	 his	 book	 The	 Twenty
Years’	Crisis,	he	divided	ideas	about	international	relations
into	 two	 camps,	 utopians	 and	 realists.	 Although	 more
sympathetic	to	realism,	he	was	not	uncritical	of	it,	since	he
considered	it	without	a	goal	or	a	basis	for	concrete	action,
and	hoped	for	a	synthesis	of	the	two	positions.
[336]
	 	 Kenneth	 Waltz	 (1924-2013)	 was	 an	 American	 political
scientist	 who	 was	 one	 of	 the	 founders	 of	 the	 neo-realist
school	 of	 political	 thought.	 He	 posited	 that	 international

relations	 are	 in	 a	 perpetual	 state	 of	 anarchy	 since,	 unlike
within	a	nation,	there	is	no	authority	higher	than	the	various
nation-states	 that	 can	 impose	 order	 from	 above.	 Waltz
believed	 that	 democracies	 seldom	 go	 to	 war	 against	 other
democracies,	 and	 that	 therefore	 the	 spread	 of	 democracy
throughout	the	world	could	help	to	bring	about	peace.	Peace
is	also	promoted	when	a	single	power	has	a	monopoly	on
violence,	as	the	United	States	currently	has.	Waltz	 believed
that	 the	 US’	 present	 role	 as	 the	 pole	 of	 a	 unipolar	 world
would	be	short-lived,	however.
[337]
		Robert	Gilpin	(b.	1930)	is	an	American	political	scientist
who,	in	recent	years,	has	been	attempting	to	apply	political
realism	 to	 America’s	 policies	 in	 the	 Middle	 East.	 He	 has
argued	 that	 when	 international	 relations	 reach	 a	 state	 of
stability,	 they	 are	 defined	 by	 the	 rise	 of	 a	 new	 hegemon
which	then	imposes	its	own	systems	on	the	rest	of	the	world,
bringing	 said	 stability.	 He	 sees	 the	 United	 States	 as	 the
current	hegemon.
[338]
	 	 John	 Mearsheimer	 (b.	 1947)	 is	 an	 American	 political
scientist.	 In	 the	 1990s	 he	 postulated	 that,	 following	 the
withdrawal	 of	 American	 and	 Soviet	 forces	 from	 Europe,
Europe	would	eventually	revert	to	a	multipolar	scenario,	and
believed	that	the	proliferation	of	nuclear	weapons	throughout
Europe	 could	 help	 to	 maintain	 peace.	 In	 2006	 he	 also

published	 a	 study	 of	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 Israel	 lobby	 on
American	politics.
[339]
		Stephen	Krasner	(b.	1942)	is	an	American	political	scientist.
He	has	argued	that	countries	such	as	the	US	are	threatened	by
weak	states	that	lack	stability,	and	that	it	is	the	responsibility
of	 strong	 nations	 to	 stabilise	 weak	 states	 by	 inculcating	 in
them	the	system	of	market-based	liberal	democracy.
[340]
		Max	Weber	(1864-1920)	was	a	German	who	is	considered
one	 of	 the	 founders	 of	 sociology.	Weber	 writes	 about	 the
‘monopoly	 of	 violence’	 by	 the	 state	 in	 his	 Politics	 as	 a
Vocation.
[341]
	 	 Thomas	 Hobbes,	Leviathan	 (Cambridge:	 Cambridge
University	Press,	1996).-AD
[342]
	 	 Niccolò	 Machiavelli,	The	 Prince	 (Cambridge:	 Cambridge
University	Press,	1988).-AD
[343]
		The	Kyoto	Protocol	is	an	international	agreement	signed	in
1997	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 reducing	 the	 amount	 of
greenhouse	 gases	 emitted,	 including	 by	 the	 Russian
Federation.
[344]
		The	European	Court	of	Human	Rights,	which	is	based	in
Strasbourg,	 France,	 enforces	 the	 European	 Convention	 on
Human	 Rights	 on	 the	 member	 states	 of	 the	 Council	 of
Europe.	The	Russian	Federation	is	a	member.

[345]
		From	‘A	Conversation	with	Vladimir	Putin,	Continuation,’
dated	   15	   December	   2011,	   available	   at
www.rg.ru/2011/12/15/stenogramma.html.-AD
[346]
		The	Komsomol	was	the	youth	division	of	the	Communist
Party	of	the	Soviet	Union.
[347]
	 	 Carl	 Schmitt,	 The	 Concept	 of	 the	 Political:	 Expanded
Edition	(Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	Press,	2007).
[348]
	 	 Eric	Voegelin	 (1901-1985)	 was	 a	 German	 conservative
political	philosopher.
[349]
		Political	theology	examines	how	theological	ideas	underlie
modern-day	social	and	political	thought.	Carl	Schmitt	argued
in	 a	 book	 of	 the	 same	 name	 that	 modern	 politics	 merely
presents	theological	concepts	in	secularised	form.
[350]
		Alexander	Rahr	(b.	1959)	is	a	German	historian	who	has
written	a	biography	of	Putin.
[351]
		Fyodor	Tyutchev	(1803-1873)	was	a	Romantic	poet.	He
was	a	Pan-Slavist	who	detested	the	West.
[352]
		List	suggested	that	an	economic	union	could	be	beneficial
for	 Europe.	 His	 ideas	 are	 credited	 with	 having	 been
influential	 on	 the	 development	 of	 the	 European	 Economic
Community.	He	established	the	first	union	for	industry	and
trade	in	Germany	in	1819.
[353]
		Epicirus	(341-270	BC)	was	a	Greek	philosopher	who	did

not	believe	that	the	body	and	soul	were	separate	entities,	and
that	the	soul	did	not	continue	to	exist	after	death.
[354]
	 	 In	 1845	 Americans	 first	 began	 to	 speak	 of	 ‘Manifest
Destiny’,	which	was	the	belief	that	America	had	a	right	and
was	 destined	 to	 spread	 throughout	 North	 America.	 Some
have	claimed	that	this	concept	never	really	left	the	American
psyche	and	that	Americans	still	feel	it	is	their	right	to	spread
their	power	and	influence	throughout	the	world.
[355]
		Charles	Kupchan,	No	One’s	World:	The	West,	the	Rising
Rest,	 and	 the	 Coming	 Global	 Turn	 (Oxford:	 Oxford
University	Press,	2012).
[356]
		Trasformismo	 in	 political	 thought	 refers	 to	 the
strengthening	of	the	centre	in	a	government	with	the	aim	of
preventing	extremes	from	either	the	Right	or	the	Left	from
taking	power.	This	was	done	in	Italy	in	the	decades	before
the	 rise	 of	 Fascism,	 and	 many	 believe	 that	 this	 caused
political	 stagnation	 and	 corruption	 which	 ultimately	 made
Mussolini’s	rise	possible.
[357]
	 	 BRICS	 was	 established	 in	 2006	 with	 the	 intention	 of
bringing	 together	 a	 series	 of	 countries	 with	 developing
economies.
[358]
		Jozéf	Retinger	(1888-1960)	was	a	Polish	political	thinker
who	was	one	of	the	founders	of	the	European	Movement	and

the	Council	of	Europe.
[359]
		Sergei	Karaganov	(b.	1952)	is	a	political	scientist	who	has
been	 an	 advisor	 to	 both	 Putin	 and	Yeltsin.	 He	 has	 been	 a
member	of	the	Trilateral	Commission	since	1998	and	served
on	the	advisory	board	of	the	Council	of	Foreign	Relations
from	1995	until	2005.
[360]
		Leonid	Gozman	(b.	1950)	has	been	the	leader	of	the	Union
of	Right	Forces	since	2011.
[361]
	 	 Lilia	 Shevtsova	 (b.	 1949)	 is	 a	 political	 scientist	 who	 is
recognised	 internationally	 as	 an	 expert	 on	 Russia	 and	 the
Kremlin.
[362]
		Vitaly	Tretyakov	(b.	1953)	is	a	well-known	journalist	and
political	scientist	in	Russia.
[363]
		Natalya	Narochnitskaya	(b.	1948)	is	a	Russian	politician
who	has	served	in	the	Duma	as	a	member	of	Rodina.
[364]
		Vadim	Bakatin	(b.	1937)	was	Minister	of	Internal	Affairs
under	Gorbachev,	and	was	then	appointed	as	chairman	of	the
KGB	 in	 August	 1991.	 	 He	 was	 the	 last	 such	 chairman,
serving	until	January	1992,	when	the	KGB	was	abolished.
[365]
		The	Izborsk	Club	is	a	patriotic	group	of	experts	founded	by
Putin	which	advises	him	on	matters	of	policy.
[366]
	 	 Roger	 Garaudy	 (1913-2012)	 was	 a	 prominent	 French
philosopher	who	had	fought	in	the	French	Resistance,	later

became	 a	 Communist,	 and	 converted	 to	 Islam	 in	 1982,
becoming	a	staunch	supporter	of	the	Palestinian	cause.	He
also	claimed	that	the	Holocaust	is	a	myth.
[367]
		Abbé	Pierre	(1912-2007)	was	a	French	Catholic	priest	and	a
member	of	the	French	Resistance.	He	served	in	the	French
Assembly	 and	 was	 a	 crusader	 for	 the	 plight	 of	 refugees
around	the	world.
[368]
		Immanuel	Wallerstein	(b.	1930)	is	an	American	sociologist
who	is	known	for	his	work	in	post-colonialist	theory	and	anti-
globalisation.	 He	 is	 a	 critic	 of	 capitalism,	 claiming	 that
capitalism	is	not	centred	in	any	specific	country	but	rather	is
synonymous	with	the	global	economy	itself.
[369]
	 	 John	 M	 Hobson,	The	 Eurocentric	 Conception	 of	World
Politics:	  Western	  International	  Theory,	  1760-2010
(Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press,	2012).
[370]
	 	 The	 following	 works	 are	 devoted	 to	 the	 problems	 of
developing	a	‘Fourth	Political	Theory’:	Alexander	Dugin,	The
Fourth	Political	Theory	(London:	Arktos,	2012);	and	Alain	de
Benoist,	Against	Liberalism:	The	Fourth	Political	Theory	(St.
Petersburg:	Amphora,	2009).	(The	latter	book	is	a	collection
of	Benoist’s	essays;	there	is	no	corresponding	title	in	French
or	 English.-Ed.)	 There	 are	 also	 Websites	 dedicated	 to	 the
development	 of	 the	 ‘Fourth	 Political	 Theory’:	4rt.su	 and
konservatizm.org/konservatizm/theory/list.xhtml.-AD

[371]
		Marcel	Mauss	(1872-1950)	was	a	sociologist	whose	work
also	 had	 a	 significant	 impact	 on	 anthropology,	 particularly
Claude	Lévi-Strauss.
[372]
		In	German,	Dasein	literally	means	‘being	there’.	It	is	one	of
the	principal	concepts	in	Heidegger’s	thought.
[373]
	 	 Yuri	 Slezkine	 (b.	 1957)	 characterises	 the	 Jews	 as
‘mercurial’,	since	they	provide	services	to	other	peoples	who
produce	food	(which	he	terms	‘Apollonian’).
[374]
		Jacques	Attali	(b.	1943)	is	a	French	economist	who	served
as	an	advisor	to	Mitterrand.	In	his	book	A	Brief	History	of	the
Future,	he	speculates	that	the	next	phase	of	capitalism	will
bring	about	a	polycentric	world	defined	by	nomadism,	which
he	believes	will	result	from	the	development	of	social	media
and	demographic	pressures.	The	ultimate	result	of	this	would
be	 a	 world	 in	 which	 nations	 cease	 to	 have	 meaning,
dominated	by	an	ultra-liberal	economic	system.
[375]
		Parag	Khanna	(b.	1977)	is	an	Indian-American	expert	on
international	relations,	and	he	is	the	author	of	the	2008	book,
The	Second	World:	Empires	and	Influence	in	the	New	Global
Order.
[376]
		Classical	Greek:	‘purpose’	or	‘goal’.
[377]
		The	Global	Revolutionary	Alliance	is	the	international	wing
of	 the	 Eurasia	 Movement.	 They	 maintain	 a	 Website	 at

www.granews.info.
[378]
		Alain	de	Benoist	(b.	1943)	is	a	French	political	philosopher
who	was	the	founder	of	the	French	‘New	Right’	school	of
thought,	 who	 has	 been	 very	 influential	 on	 Dugin	 and	 the
Eurasia	Movement.
[379]
	 	 Peter	 I	 (1672-1725),	 or	 Peter	 the	 Great,	 attempted	 to
overcome	 traditional	 Russia,	 which	 he	 regarded	 as
backwards,	in	favor	of	importing	Enlightenment	ideas	from
Europe.
[380]
		Spengler	discusses	this	idea	in	his	book	Man	and	Technics.
[381]
		To	ride	the	tiger	means	to	cling	to	his	back	rather	than	have
to	 deal	 with	 his	 fangs	 and	 claws.	The	 Italian	 traditionalist
Julius	Evola	used	the	term	as	an	analogy	with	the	best	way	of
dealing	with	the	modern	world	for	those	who	are	dissenters:
try	to	ride	along	with	it	without	getting	caught	up	in	it,	rather
than	attack	it	directly.
[382]
	 	 Lou	 Andreas-Salomé	 (1861-1937)	 was	 a	 Russian-born
intellectual	who	lived	most	of	her	life	in	Europe.	Although
she	 spurned	 Nietzsche,	 with	 whom	 she	 had	 a	 close
relationship,	 she	 had	 affairs	 with	 Rainer	 Maria	 Rilke	 and
Sigmund	Freud,	among	others.
[383]
		Latin:	‘unity	of	opposites’.
[384]
	 	 Sir	 Karl	 Popper	 (1902-1994)	 was	 an	 Austrian-British

philosopher	 who	 was	 well-known	 for	 his	 defence	 of	 the
principles	of	liberal	democracy.
[385]
	 	 Karl	 Popper,	The	Open	Society	and	Its	Enemies,	 2	 vols.
(London:	Routledge	&	Kegan	Paul,	1945).
[386]
		Edward	Luttwak,	Turbo-capitalism:	Winners	and	Losers	in
the	Global	Economy	(New	York:	HarperCollins,	1999).
[387]
		Arnold	Gehlen	(1904-1976)	was	a	German	anthropologist
and	philosopher	of	a	conservative	bent.	Dugin	is	referring	to
his	 book,	Man:	 His	 Nature	 and	 Place	 in	 the	World	 (New
York:	Columbia	University	Press,	1988).
[388]
		Advaita	Vedanta	is	one	the	major	schools	of	Hinduism,	and
teaches	that	the	goal	of	life	is	to	realise	the	illusory	nature	of
one’s	 Self	 and	 achieve	 liberation	 by	 losing	 one’s	 personal
characteristics	 and	 joining	 impersonal	 Brahman	 at	 death,
which	is	the	eternal	substance	that	underlies	the	universe.	In
this	sense	it	is	similar	to	Buddhism.
[389]
		Alexis	De	Tocqueville	(1805-1859)	was	a	French	political
thinker	 best	 known	 for	 his	 work,	Democracy	 in	 America,
which	was	based	on	his	experiences	while	travelling	in	the
US.	Although	De	Tocqueville	was	a	democrat	who	opposed
the	 monarchy	 of	 his	 day,	 he	 also	 opposed	 the	 socialist
radicals.	 In	 his	 study	 of	 the	 US,	 he	 praised	 America’s
democratic	 system,	 but	 disliked	Americans’	 obsession	 with
money	and	their	contempt	for	elites,	since	even	though	the

latter	is	what	enabled	them	to	do	away	with	the	old	colonial
aristocracy,	 it	 also	 caused	 them	 to	 disregard	 the	 most
intelligent	members	of	their	society,	coining	the	term	‘tyranny
of	the	majority’	to	describe	it.
[390]
		Jean	Baudrillard	(1929-2007)	was	a	French	philosopher.
Dugin	 is	 referring	 to	 his	 book,	America	(London:	 Verso,
1989).
[391]
		René	Alleau	(1917-2013)	was	a	writer	on	esotericism	and
occultism.	His	book	on	Guénon	is	René	Guénon	et	l’actualité
de	 la	 pensée	 traditionnelle	(Braine-le-Comte:	 Éditions	 du
Baucens,	1977).	No	English	translation	exists.
[392]
	 	 Giordano	 Bruno	 (1548-1600)	 was	 an	 Italian	 Dominican
friar	and	philosopher	of	the	Renaissance	who	was	influenced
by	 Neoplatonism	 and	 Hermeticism,	 and	 harboured	 many
pantheistic	ideas.	He	also	believed	that	all	of	the	races	were
created	 separately,	 rather	 than	 possessing	 a	 common
ancestor.	He	also	claimed	that	the	Sun	was	just	an	ordinary
star	and	that	the	universe	contained	many	inhabited	worlds.
He	 was	 imprisoned	 by	 the	 Church’s	 Inquisition	 and
eventually	burned	at	the	stake	for	his	heretical	views.
[393]
		Thomas	Müntzer	(1489-1525)	was	a	German	theologian
who	thought	the	ideas	of	the	Reformation	should	be	applied
to	economics,	and	he	was	one	of	the	leaders	of	the	German
Peasants’	War,	for	which	he	was	executed.

[394]
		In	his	book	The	New	Science	of	Politics,	Voegelin	wrote,
‘The	problem	of	an	eidos	in	history,	hence,	arises	only	when
a	Christian	transcendental	fulfillment	becomes	immanentized.
Such	an	immanentist	hypostasis	of	the	eschaton,	however,	is
a	 theoretical	 fallacy.’	 He	 was	 essentially	 writing	 that	 we
should	not	attempt	to	realize	on	Earth	what	properly	belongs
in	Heaven	—	utopia.
[395]
		Alain	de	Benoist	&	Charles	Champetier,	Manifesto	for	a
European	Renaissance	(London:	Arktos,	2012).
[396]
		Georges	Bataille	(1897-1962)	was	a	French	writer.